{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg936\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\info
{\author \'cc\'b7\'d2\'ab}}\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12200\viewh16380\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Husband\'92s Story, by David Graham\
Phillips\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and\
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions\
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms\
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at\
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you\
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before\
using this eBook.\
\
Title: The Husband\'92s Story\
\
Author: David Graham Phillips\
\
Release Date: February 14, 2022 [eBook #67406]\
\
Language: English\
\
Produced by: D A Alexander, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed\
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was\
             produced from images generously made available by\
             University of California libraries)\
\
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUSBAND\'92S STORY ***\
\
\
\
\
\
  _The_\
  HUSBAND\'92S STORY\
\
\
\
\
  The\
  Husband\'92s Story\
\
  A NOVEL\
\
  BY\
  DAVID GRAHAM PHILLIPS\
\
  AUTHOR OF\
  THE FASHIONABLE ADVENTURES OF\
  JOSHUA CRAIG, OLD WIVES FOR NEW\
  THE SECOND GENERATION, ETC.\
\
  [Illustration]\
\
  NEW YORK\
  GROSSET & DUNLAP\
  PUBLISHERS\
\
\
\
\
  COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY\
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY\
\
  _Published September, 1910_\
\
  Printed in the United States of America\
\
\
\
\
THE HUSBAND\'92S STORY\
\
\
\
\
WHY\
\
\
Several years ago circumstances thrust me into a position in which it\
became possible for the friend who figures in these pages as Godfrey\
Loring to do me a favor. He, being both wise and kindly, never misses\
a good chance to put another under obligations. He did me the favor.\
I gratefully, if reluctantly, acquiesced. Now, after many days, he\
collects. When you shall have read what follows, you may utterly reject\
my extenuating plea that any and every point of view upon life is\
worthy of attention, even though it serve only to confirm us in our\
previous ideas and beliefs. You may say that I should have repudiated\
my debt, should have refused to edit and publish the manuscript he\
confided to me. You may say that the general racial obligation to\
mankind--and to womankind--takes precedence over a private and personal\
obligation. Unfortunately I happen to be not of the philanthropic\
temperament. My sense of the personal is strong; my sense of the\
general weak--that is to say, weak in comparison. If \'93Loring\'94 had\
been within reach, I think I should have gone to him and pleaded for\
release. But as luck will have it, he is off yachting, to peep about\
in the remote inlets and islets of Australasia and the South Seas for\
several years.\
\
To aggravate my situation, in the letter accompanying the manuscript,\
after several pages of the discriminating praise most dear to a\
writer\'92s heart, he did me the supreme honor of saying that in his\
work he had \'93striven to copy as closely as might be your style and\
your methods--to help me to the hearing I want and to lighten your\
labors as editor.\'94 I assure him and the public that in any event I\
should have done little editing of his curious production beyond such\
as a proofreader might have found necessary. As it is, I have done\
practically no editing at all. In form and in substance, from title to\
finis, the work is his. I am merely its sponsor--and in circumstances\
that would forbid me were I disposed to qualify my sponsorship with\
even so mild a disclaimer as reluctance.\
\
Have I said more than a loyal friend should? If so, on the other hand,\
have I not done all that a loyal friend could?\
\
\
\
\
I\
\
\
I am tempted to begin with our arrival in Fifth Avenue, New York City,\
in the pomp and circumstance befitting that region of regal splendor.\
I should at once catch the attention of the women; and my literary\
friends tell me that to make any headway with a story in America it is\
necessary to catch the women, because the men either do not read books\
at all or read only what they hear the women talking about. And I know\
well--none knows better--that our women of the book-buying class, and\
probably of all classes, love to amuse their useless idleness with\
books that help them to dream of wasting large sums of money upon\
luxuries and extravagances, upon entertaining grand people in grand\
houses and being entertained by them. They tell me, and I believe it,\
that our women abhor stories of middle-class life, abhor truth-telling\
stories of any kind, like only what assures them that the promptings of\
their own vanities and sentimental shams are true.\
\
But patience, gentle reader, you with the foolish, chimera-haunted\
brain, with the silly ideas of life, with the ignorance of human\
nature including your own self, with the love of sloppy and tawdry\
clap trap. Patience, gentle reader. While I shall begin humbly in\
the social scale, I shall not linger there long. I shall pass on to\
the surroundings of grandeur that entrance your snobbish soul. You\
will soon smell only fine perfumes, only the aromas of food cooked by\
expensive chefs. You will sit in drawing-rooms, lie in bedrooms as\
magnificent as the architects and decorators and other purveyors to\
the very rich have been able to concoct. You will be tasting the fine\
savors of fashionable names and titles recorded in Burke\'92s and the\
\'93Almanach de Gotha.\'94 Patience, gentle reader, with your box of caramels\
and your hair in curl papers and your household work undone--patience!\
A feast awaits you.\
\
There has been much in the papers these last few years about the\
splendid families we--my wife and I--came of. Some time ago one of the\
English dukes--a nice chap with nothing to do and a quaint sense of\
humor--assembled on his estate for a sort of holiday and picnic all the\
members of his ancient and proud family who could be got together by\
several months of diligent search. It was a strange and awful throng\
that covered the lawns before the ducal castle on the appointed day.\
There was a handful of fairly presentable, more or less prosperous\
persons. But the most of the duke\'92s cousins, near and remote, were\
tramps, bartenders, jail birds, women of the town, field hands male\
and female, sewer cleaners, chimney sweeps, needlewomen, curates,\
small shopkeepers, and others of the species that are as a stench\
unto delicate, aristocratic nostrils. The duke was delighted with his\
picnic, pronounced it a huge success. But then His Grace had a sense of\
humor and was not an American aristocrat.\
\
All this by way of preparation for the admission that the branch of\
the Loring family from which I come and the branch of the Wheatlands\
family to which the girl I married belongs were far from magnificent,\
were no more imposing then, well, than the families of any of our\
American aristocrats. Like theirs, our genealogical tree, most\
imposingly printed and bound and proudly exhibited on a special stand\
in the library of our New York palace--that genealogical tree, for all\
its air of honesty, for all its documentary proofs, worm-eaten and\
age-stained, was like an artificial palm bedded in artificial moss.\
The truth is, aristocracy does not thrive in America, but only the\
pretense of it, and that must be kept alive by constant renewals. Both\
here and abroad I am constantly running across traces of illegitimacy,\
substitution, and other forms of genealogical flim-flam. But let that\
pass. Whoever is or is not aristocratic, certainly Godfrey Loring and\
Edna Wheatlands are not--or, rather, _were_ not.\
\
My father kept a dejected little grocery in Passaic, N. J. He did\
not become a \'93retired merchant and capitalist\'94 until I was able to\
retire and capitalize him. Edna\'92s father was-- No, you guess wrong.\
Not a butcher, but--an undertaker!... Whew! I am glad to have these\
shameful secrets \'93off the chest,\'94 as they say in the Bowery. He--this\
Wheatlands, undertaker to the poor and near-poor of the then village\
of Passaic--was a tall, thin man, with snow-white hair and a smooth,\
gaunt, gloomy face and the best funeral air I have ever seen. Edna has\
long since forgotten him; she has an admirable ability absolutely to\
forget anything she may for whatever reason deem it inconvenient to\
remember. What an aid to conscience is such a quality! But I have not\
forgotten old Weeping Willy Wheatlands, and I shall not forget him. It\
was he who loaned me my first capital, the one that-- But I must not\
anticipate.\
\
In those days Passaic was a lowly and a dreary village. Its best was\
cheap enough; its poorest was wretchedly squalid. The \'93seat\'94 of the\
Lorings and the \'93seat\'94 of the Wheatlands stood side by side on the\
mosquito beset banks of the river--two dingy frame cottages, a story\
and a half in height, two rooms deep. We Lorings had no money, for my\
father was an honest, innocent soul with a taste for talking what he\
thought was politics, though in fact he knew no more of the realities\
of politics, the game of pull Dick pull Devil for licenses to fleece\
a \'93free, proud and intelligent people\'94--he knew no more of that\
reality than--than the next honest soul you may hear driveling on that\
same subject. We had no money, but \'93Weeping Willie\'94 had plenty--and\
saved it, blessings on him! I hate to think where I should be now,\
if he hadn\'92t hoarded! So, while our straightened way of living was\
compulsory, that of the Wheatlands was not. But this is unimportant;\
the main point is both families lived in the same humble way.\
\
If I thought \'93gentle reader\'94 had patience and real imagination--and,\
yes, the real poetic instinct--I should give her an inventory of\
the furniture of those two cottages, and of the meager and patched\
draperies of the two Monday wash lines, as my mother and Edna\'92s\
mother--and Edna, too, when she grew big enough--decorated them, the\
while shrieking gossip back and forth across the low and battered board\
fence. But I shall not linger. It is as well. Those memories make me\
sad--put a choke in my throat and a mist before my eyes. Why? If you\
can\'92t guess, I could not in spoiling ten reams of paper explain it\
to you. One detail only, and I shall hasten on. Both families lived\
humbly, but we not quite so humbly as the Wheatlands family, because my\
mother was a woman of some neatness and energy while Ma Wheatlands was\
at or below the do-easy, slattern human average. _We_ had our regular\
Saturday bath--in the wash tub. _We_ did not ever eat off the stove.\
And while we were patched we were rarely ragged.\
\
In those days--even in those days--Edna was a \'93scrapper.\'94 They call it\
an \'93energetic and resolute personality\'94 now; it was called \'93scrappy\'94\
then, and scrappy it was. When I would be chopping wood or lugging\
in coal, so occupied that I did not dare pause, she would sit on the\
fence in her faded blue-dotted calico, and how she would give it to me!\
She knew how to say the thing that made me wild with the rage a child\
is ashamed to show. Yes, she loved to tease me, perhaps--really, I\
hope--because she knew I, in the bottom of my heart, loved to be teased\
by her, to be noticed in any way. And mighty pretty she looked then,\
with her mop of yellowish brown hair and her big golden brown eyes\
and her little face, whose every feature was tilted to the angle that\
gives precisely the most fascinating expression of pretty pertness, of\
precocious intelligence, or of devil-may-care audacity. She has always\
been a pretty woman, has Edna, and always will be, even in old age, I\
fancy. Her beauty, like her health, like that strong, supple body of\
hers, was built to last. What is the matter with the generations coming\
forward now? Why do they bloom only to wither? What has sapped their\
endurance? Are they brought up too soft? Is it the food? Is it the\
worn-out parents? Why am I, at forty, younger in looks and in strength\
and in taste for life than the youths of thirty? Why is Edna, not five\
years my junior, more attractive physically than girls of twenty-five\
or younger?\
\
But she was only eight or nine at the time of which I am writing.\
And she was fond of me then--really fond of me, though she denied it\
furiously when the other children taunted, and though she was always\
jeering at me, calling me awkward and homely. I don\'92t think I was\
notably either the one or the other, but for her to say so tended to\
throw the teasers off the track and also kept me in humble subjection.\
I knew she cared, because when we played kissing games she would never\
call me out, would call out every other boy, but if I called any other\
girl she would sulk and treat me as badly as she knew how. Also, while\
she had nothing but taunts and sarcasms for me she was always to be\
found in the Wheatlands\'92 back yard near the fence or on it whenever I\
was doing chores in our back yard.\
\
After two years in the High School I went to work in the railway office\
as a sort of assistant freight clerk. She kept on at school, went\
through the High School, graduated in a white dress with blue ribbons,\
and then sat down to wait for a husband. Her father and mother were\
sensible people. Heaven knows they had led a hard enough life to have\
good sense driven into them. But the tradition--the lady-tradition--was\
too strong for them. They were not ashamed to work, themselves. They\
would have been both ashamed and angry had it been suggested to them\
that their two boys should become idlers. But they never thought of\
putting their daughter to work at anything. After she graduated and\
became a young lady, she was not compelled--would hardly have been\
permitted--to do housework or sewing. You have seen the potted flower\
in the miserable tenement window--the representative of the life that\
neither toils nor spins, but simply exists in idle beauty. That potted\
bloom concentrates all the dreams, all the romantic and poetic fancies\
of the tenement family. I suppose Edna was some such treasured exotic\
possession to those toil-twisted old parents of hers. They wanted a\
flower in the house.\
\
Well, they had it. She certainly was a lovely girl, far too lovely\
to be spoiled by work. And if ever there was a scratch or a stain on\
those beautiful white hands of hers, it assuredly was not made by toil.\
She took music lessons-- Music lessons! How much of the ridiculous,\
pathetic gropings after culture is packed into those two words. Beyond\
question, everyone ought to know something about music; we should all\
know something about everything, especially about the things that\
peculiarly stand for civilization--science and art, literature and\
the drama. But how foolishly we are set at it! Instead of learning to\
understand and to appreciate music, we are taught to \'93beat the box\'94 in\
a feeble, clumsy fashion, or to screech or whine when we have no voice\
worth the price of a single lesson. Edna took I don\'92t know how many\
lessons a week for I don\'92t know how many years. She learned nothing\
about music. She merely learned to strum on the piano. But, after all,\
the lessons attained their real object. They made Edna\'92s parents and\
Edna herself and all the neighbors feel that she was indeed a lady.\
She could not sew. She could not cook. She hadn\'92t any knowledge worth\
mention of any practical thing--therefore, had no knowledge at all;\
for, unless knowledge is firmly based upon and in the practical, it is\
not knowledge but that worst form of ignorance, misinformation. She\
didn\'92t know a thing that would help her as woman, wife, or mother. But\
she could play the piano!\
\
Some day some one will write something true on the subject of\
education. You remember the story of the girl from Lapland who applied\
for a place as servant in New York, and when they asked her what she\
could do, she said, \'93I can milk the reindeer.\'94\
\
I never hear the word education that I don\'92t think of that girl.\
One half of the time spent at school, to estimate moderately, and\
nine tenths of the time spent in college class rooms is given to\
things about as valuable to a citizen of this world as the Lap girl\'92s\
\'93education\'94 to a New York domestic. If anyone tells you that those\
valueless things are culture, tell him that only an ignorance still\
becalmed in the dense medi\'e6val fog would talk such twaddle; tell him\
that science has taught us what common sense has always shown, that\
there is no beauty divorced from use, that beauty is simply the\
perfect adaptation of the thing to be used to the purpose for which it\
is to be used. I am a business man, not a smug, shallow-pated failure\
teaching in an antiquated college. I abhor the word culture, as I abhor\
the word gentleman or the word lady, because of the company into which\
it has fallen. So, while I eagerly disclaim any taint of \'93culture,\'94 I\
insist that I know what I\'92m talking about when I talk of education. And\
if I had not been too good-natured, my girl-- But I must keep to the\
story. \'93Gentle reader\'94 wants a story; he--or she--does not want to try\
to think.\
\
It was pleasant to my ignorant ears to hear Edna playing sonatas and\
classical barcaroles and dead marches and all manner of loud and\
difficult pieces. Such sounds, issuing from the humble--and not too\
clean--Wheatlands house gave it an atmosphere of aristocracy, put\
tone into the whole neighborhood, elevated the Wheatlands family like\
a paper collar on the calico shirt of a farm hand. If we look at\
ourselves rightly, we poor smattering seekers after a little showy\
knowledge of one kind or another--a dibble of French, a dabble of\
Latin or Greek, a sputter of woozy so-called philosophy--how like the\
paper-collared farm hand we are, how like the Hottentot chief with a\
plug hat atop his naked brown body.\
\
But Edna pleased me, fully as much as she pleased herself, and\
that is saying a great deal. I wouldn\'92t have had her changed in\
the smallest particular. I was even glad she could get rid of her\
freckles--fascinating little beauty spots sprinkled upon her tip-tilted\
little nose!\
\
She was not so fond of me in those days. I had a rival. I am leaning\
back and laughing as I think of him. Charley Putney! He was clerk in\
a largish dry goods store. He is still a clerk there, I believe, and\
no doubt is still the same cheaply scented, heavily pomatumed clerkly\
swell he was in the days when I feared and hated him. The store used\
to close at six o\'92clock. About seven of summer evenings Charley would\
issue forth from his home to set the hearts of the girls to fluttering.\
They were all out, waiting. Down the street he would come with his hat\
set a little back to show the beautiful shine and part and roach of his\
hair. The air would become delicious (!) with bergamot, occasionally\
varied by German cologne or lemon verbena. What a jaunty, gay tie!\
What an elegant suit! And he wore a big seal ring, reputed to be real\
gold--and such lively socks! Down the street came Charley, all the\
girls palpitant. At which stoop or front gate would he stop?\
\
Often--only too often--it was at the front gate next ours. How I hated\
him!\
\
And the cap of the joke is that Edna nearly married him. In this land\
where the social stairs are crowded like Jacob\'92s Ladder with throngs\
ascending and descending, what a history it would make if the grown men\
and women of any generation should tell whom they _almost_ married!\
\
Yes, Edna came very near to marrying him. She was a lady. She did not\
know exactly what that meant. The high-life novels she read left her\
hazy on the subject, because to understand any given thing we must\
have knowledge that enables us to connect it with the things we already\
know. A snowball would be an unfathomable mystery to a savage living in\
an equatorial plain. A matter of politics or finance or sociology or\
real art, real literature, real philosophy, seems dull and meaningless\
to a woman or to the average mutton-brained man. But if you span the\
gap between knowledge of any subject and a woman\'92s or a man\'92s ignorance\
of that subject with however slender threads of connecting knowledge,\
she or he can at once bridge it and begin to reap the new fields. Edna\
could not find any thread whatever for the gap between herself and that\
fairy land of high life the novels told her about. In those days there\
was no high life in Passaic. I suppose there is now--or, at least,\
Passaic thinks there is--and in purely imaginary matters the delusion\
of possession is equal to, even better than, possession itself. So,\
with no high life to use as a measure, with only the instinct that her\
white smooth hands and her dresses modeled on the latest Paris fashions\
as illustrated in the monthly \'93Lady Book,\'94 and her music lessons, her\
taste for what she then regarded as literature--with only her instinct\
that all these hallmarks must stamp her twenty-four carat lady, she\
had to look about her for a matching gentleman. And there was Charley,\
the one person within vision who suggested the superb heroes of the\
high-life novels. I will say to the credit of her good taste that\
she had her doubts about Charley. Indeed, if his sweet smell and his\
smooth love-making--Charley excelled as a love-maker, being the born\
ladies\'92 man--if the man, or, rather, the boy, himself had not won her\
heart, she would soon have tired of him and would have suspected his\
genuineness as a truly gentleman. But she fell in love with him.\
\
There was a long time during which I thought the reason she returned\
to me--or, rather, let me return to her--was because she fell out of\
love with him. Then there was a still longer time when I thought the\
reason was the fact that the very Saturday I got a raise to fourteen\
a week, he fell from twelve to eight. But latterly I have known the\
truth. How many of us know the truth, the down-at-the-bottom, absolute\
truth, about why she married us instead of the other fellow? Very few,\
I guess--or we\'92d be puffing our crops and flirting our feathers less\
cantily. She took up with me again because he dropped her. It was he\
that saved her, not she or I. Only a few months ago, her old mother,\
doddering on in senility, with memory dead except for early happenings,\
and these fresh and vivid, said: \'93And when I think how nigh Edny come\
to marryin\'92 up with that there loud-smelling dude of a Charley Putney!\
If he hadn\'92t \'92a give her the go by, she\'92d sure \'92a made a fool of\
herself--a wantin\'92 me and her paw to offer him money and a job in the\
undertakin\'92 store, to git him back. Lawsy me! What a narrer squeak fur\
Princess Edny!\'94\
\
Be patient, gentle reader! You shall soon be reading things that will\
efface the coarse impression my old mother-in-law\'92s language and all\
these franknesses about our beginnings must have made upon your refined\
and cultured nature. Swallow a caramel and be patient. But don\'92t skip\
these pages. If you should, you would miss the stimulating effect of\
contrast, not to speak of other benefits which I, probably vainly, hope\
to confer upon you.\
\
She didn\'92t love me. Looking back, I see that for many months she\
found it difficult to endure me. But it was necessary that she carry\
off--with the neighborhood rather than with me--her pretense of having\
cast off Charley because she preferred me. We can do wonders in the\
way of concealing wounded pride; we can do equal wonders in the way\
of preserving a reputation for unbroken victory. And I believe she\
honestly liked me. Perhaps she liked me even more than she liked her\
aromatic Charley; for, it by no means follows that we like best where\
we love most. I am loth to believe--I do not believe--that at so early\
an age, not quite seventeen, she could have received my caresses and\
returned them with plausibility enough to deceive me, unless she had\
genuinely liked me.\
\
And what a lucky fellow I thought myself! And how I patronized the\
perfumed man. And what a thrashing I gave him--poor, harmless, witless\
creature!--when I heard of his boastings that he had dropped Edna\
Wheatlands because he found Sally Simpson prettier and more _cultured_!\
\
I must have been a railway man born. At twenty-two--no, six months\
after my majority--I was jumped into a head clerkship at twelve\
hundred a year. Big pay for a youngster in those days; not so bad for\
a youngster even in these inflated years. When I brought Edna the news\
I think she began to love me. To her that salary was a halo, a golden\
halo round me--made me seem a superior person. She had long thought\
highly of my business abilities, for she was shrewd and had listened\
when the older people talked, and they were all for me as the likeliest\
young man of the neighborhood.\
\
\'93I\'92ve had another raise,\'94 said I carelessly. We were sitting on her\
front porch, she upon the top step, I two steps down.\
\
\'93Another!\'94 she said. \'93Why, the last was only two months ago.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, they\'92ve pushed me up to twelve hundred a year--a little more, for\
it\'92s twenty-five per.\'94\
\
\'93Gee!\'94 she exclaimed, and I can see her pretty face now--all aglow,\
beaming a reverent admiration upon me.\
\
I rather thought I deserved it. But it has ever been one of my vanities\
to pretend to take my successes as matters of course, and even to\
depreciate them. They say the English invariably win in diplomacy\
because they act dissatisfied with what they get, never grumbling so\
sourly as when they capture the whole hog. I can believe it. That\
has been my policy, and it has worked rather well. Still, any policy\
works well if the man has the gift for success. \'93Twenty-five per,\'94 I\
repeated, to impress it still more deeply upon her and to revel in the\
thrilling words. \'93Before I get through I\'92ll make them pay me what I\'92m\
worth.\'94\
\
\'93Do you think you\'92ll ever be making more than that?\'94 exclaimed she,\
wonderingly.\
\
\'93I\'92ll be getting two thousand some day,\'94 said I, far more confidently\
than I felt.\
\
\'93Oh--Godfrey!\'94 she said softly.\
\
And as I looked at her I for the first time felt a certain peculiar\
thrill that comes only when the soul of the woman a man loves rushes\
forth to cling to his soul. In my life I have never had--and never\
shall have--a happier moment.\
\
Once more patience, gentle reader! I know this bit of sordidness--this\
glow of sentiment upon a vulgar material incident--disgusts your\
delicate soul. I am aware that you have a proper contempt for all the\
coarse details of life. You would not be _gentle_ reader if you hadn\'92t.\
You would be a plain man or woman, living busily and usefully, and\
making people happy in the plain ways in which the human animal finds\
happiness. You would not be devoting your days to making soul-food out\
of idealistic moonshine and dreaming of ways to dazzle yourself and\
your acquaintances into thinking you a superior person.\
\
\'93Do you know,\'94 said my pretty Edna, advancing her bond at least halfway\
toward meeting mine, \'93do you know, I\'92ve had an instinct, a presentiment\
of this? I was dreaming it when I woke up this morning.\'94\
\
I\'92ve observed that every woman in her effort to prove herself \'93not like\
other girls\'94 pretends to some occult or other equally supranatural\
quality. One dreams dreams. Another gets spirit messages. A third has\
seen ghosts. Another has a foot which sculptors have longed to model.\
A fifth has a note in her voice which the throat specialists pronounce\
unique in the human animal and occurring only in certain rare birds\
and Sarah Bernhardt. I met one not long ago who had several too many\
or too few skins, I forget which, and as a result was endowed with\
I cannot recall what nervous qualities quite peculiar to herself,\
and somehow most valuable and fascinating. In that early stage of\
her career my Edna was \'93hipped\'94 upon a rather commonplace personal\
characteristic--the notion that she had premonitions, was a sort of\
seeress or prophetess. Later she dropped it for one less tiresome\
and overworked. But I recall that even in that time of my deepest\
infatuation I wished to hear as little as possible about the occult.\
Of all the shallow, foggy fakes that attract ignorant and miseducated\
people the occult is the most inexcusable and boring. A great many\
people, otherwise apparently rather sensible, seem honestly to believe\
in it. But, being sensible, they don\'92t have anything to do with it.\
They treat it as practical men treat the idiotic in the creeds and\
the impossible in the moral codes of the churches to which they\
belong--that is, they assent and proceed to dismiss and to forget.\
\
However, I was not much impressed by Edna\'92s attempt to dazzle me with\
her skill as a Sibyl. But I was deeply impressed by the awe-inspiring\
softness and shapeliness of her hand lying prisoner in mine. And I was\
moved to the uttermost by the kisses and embraces we exchanged in the\
gathering dusk. \'93I love you,\'94 she murmured into my ecstatic ear. \'93You\
are so different from the other men round here.\'94\
\
I dilated with pride.\
\
\'93So far ahead of them in every way.\'94\
\
\'93Ahead of Charley Putney?\'94 said I, jocose but jealous withal.\
\
She laughed with a delightful look of contemptuous scorn in her cute\
face. \'93Oh, _he_!\'94 she scoffed. \'93He\'92s getting only eight a week, and\
he\'92ll never get any more.\'94\
\
\'93Not if his boss has sense,\'94 said I, thinking myself judicial. \'93But\
let\'92s talk about ourselves. We can be married now.\'94\
\
I advanced this timidly, for being a truly-in-love lover I was a little\
afraid of her, a little uncertain of this priceless treasure. But she\
answered promptly, \'93Yes, I was thinking of that.\'94\
\
\'93Let\'92s do it right away,\'94 proposed I.\
\
\'93Oh, not for several weeks. It wouldn\'92t be proper.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94\
\
She couldn\'92t explain. She only knew that there was something indecent\
about haste in such matters, that the procedure must be slow and\
orderly and stately. \'93We\'92ll marry the first of next month,\'94 she finally\
decided, and I joyfully acquiesced.\
\
Some of my readers--both of the gentle and of the other kind--may\
be surprised that a girl of seventeen should be so self-assured, so\
independent. They must remember that she was a daughter of the people;\
and among the people a girl of seventeen was, and I suppose still is,\
ready for marriage, ready and resolved to decide all important matters\
for herself. At seventeen Edna, in self-poise and in experience,\
judgment and all the other mature qualities, was the equal of the\
carefully sheltered girl of twenty-five or more. She may have been\
brought up a lady, may have been in all essential ways as useless as\
the most admired of that weariful and worthless class. But the very\
nature of her surroundings, in that simple household and that simple\
community, had given her a certain practical education. And I may say\
here that to it she owes all she is to-day. Do not forget this, gentle\
reader, as you read about her and as she dazzles you. As you look at\
the gorgeous hardy rose do not forget that such spring only from the\
soil, develop only in the open.\
\
That very evening we began to look for a home. As soon as we were\
outside her front gate she turned in the direction of the better part\
of the town. Nor did she pause or so much as glance at a house until\
we were clear of the neighborhood in which we had always lived, and\
were among houses much superior. I admired, and I still admire, this\
significant move of hers. It was the gesture of progress, of ambition.\
It was splendidly American. I myself should have been content to settle\
down near our fathers and mothers, among the people we knew. I should\
no doubt have been better satisfied to keep up the mode of living to\
which we had been used all our lives. The time would have come when I\
should have reached out for more comfort and for luxury. But it was\
natural that she should develop in this direction before I did. She\
had read her novels and her magazines, had the cultured woman\'92s innate\
fondness for dress and show, had had nothing but those kinds of things\
to think about; I had been too busy trying to make money to have any\
time for getting ideas about spending it.\
\
No; while her motive in seeking better things than we had known was in\
the main a vanity and a sham, her action had as much _initial_ good in\
it as if her motive had been sensible and helpful. And back of the\
motive lay an instinct for getting up in the world that has been the\
redeeming and preserving trait in her character. It was this instinct\
that ought to have made her the fit wife for an ambitious and advancing\
man. You will presently see how this fine and useful instinct was\
perverted by vanity and false education and the pernicious example of\
other women.\
\
\'93The rents are much higher in this neighborhood,\'94 said I, with a\
doubtful but admiring look round at the pretty houses and their\
well-ordered grounds.\
\
\'93Of course,\'94 said she. \'93But maybe we can find something. Anyway, it\
won\'92t do any harm to look.\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 I assented, for I liked the idea myself. This better\
neighborhood _looked_ more like her than her own, seemed to her lover\'92s\
eyes exactly suited to her beauty and her stylishness--for the \'93Lady\
Book\'94 was teaching her to make herself far more attractive to the eye\
than were the other girls over in our part of town. I still puzzle at\
why Charley Putney gave her up; the only plausible theory seems to be\
that she was so sick in love with him that she wearied him. The most\
attractive girl in the world, if she dotes on a young man too ardently,\
will turn his stomach, and alarm his delicate sense of feminine\
propriety.\
\
As we walked on, she with an elate and proud air, she said: \'93How\
different it smells over here!\'94\
\
At first I didn\'92t understand what she meant. But, as I thought of\
her remark, the meaning came. And I believe that was the beginning\
of my dissatisfaction with what I had all my life had in the way of\
surroundings. I have since observed that the sense of smell is blunt,\
is almost latent, in people of the lower orders, and that it becomes\
more acute and more sensitive as we ascend in the social scale. Up to\
that time my ambition to rise had been rather indefinite--a desire\
to make money which everyone seemed to think was the highest aim in\
life--and also an instinct to beat the other fellows working with me.\
Now it became definite. I began to smell. I wanted to get away from\
unpleasant smells. I do not mean that this was a resolution, all in\
the twinkling of an eye. I simply mean that, as everything must have a\
beginning, that remark of hers was for me the beginning of a long and\
slow but steady process of what may be called civilizing.\
\
Presently she said: \'93If we couldn\'92t afford a house, we might take one\
of the flats.\'94\
\
\'93But I\'92m afraid you\'92d be lonesome, away off from everybody we know.\'94\
\
She tossed her head. \'93A good lonesome,\'94 said she. \'93I\'92m tired of\
_common_ people. I was reading about reincarnations the other day.\'94\
\
\'93Good Lord!\'94 laughed I. \'93What are they?\'94\
\
She explained--as well as she could--probably as well as anybody could.\
I admired her learning but the thing itself did not interest me. \'93I\
guess there must be something in it,\'94 she went on. \'93I\'92m sure in a\
former life I was something a lot different from what I am now.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you\'92re all right,\'94 I assured her, putting my arm round her in the\
friendly darkness of a row of sidewalk elms.\
\
When we had indulged in an interlude of love-making, she returned to\
the original subject. \'93I wonder how much rent we could afford to pay,\'94\
said she.\
\
\'93They say the rent ought never to be more per month than the income is\
per week.\'94\
\
\'93Then we could pay twenty-five a month.\'94\
\
That seemed to me a lot to pay--and, indeed, it was. But she did not\
inherit Weeping Willie\'92s tightness; and she had never had money to\
spend or any training in either making or spending money. That is\
to say, she was precisely as ignorant of the main business of life\
as is the rest of American womanhood under our ridiculous system of\
education. So, twenty-five dollars a month rent meant nothing to her.\
\'93We can\'92t do anything to-night,\'94 said she. \'93But I\'92ve got my days free,\
and I\'92ll look at different places, and when I find several to choose\
from we can come in the evening or on Sunday and decide.\'94\
\
This suited me exactly. We dismissed the matter, hunted out a shady\
nook, and sat down to enjoy ourselves after the manner of young\
lovers on a fine night. Never before had she given herself freely to\
love. I know now it was because never before had she loved me. I was\
deliriously happy that night, and I am sure she was too. She no less\
than I had the ardent temperament that goes with the ambitious nature;\
and now that she was idealizing me into the man who could lead her to\
the fairy lands she dreamed of, she gave me her whole heart.\
\
It was the beginning of what was beyond question the happiest period of\
both our lives. I have a dim old photograph of us two taken about that\
time. At a glance you see it is the picture of two young people of the\
working class--two green, unformed creatures, badly dressed and gawkily\
self-conscious. But there is a look in her face--and in mine-- To be\
quite honest, I\'92m glad I don\'92t look like that now. I wouldn\'92t go back\
if I could. Nevertheless-- How we loved each other!--and how happy we\
were!\
\
I feel that I weary you, gentle reader. There is in my sentiment too\
much about wages and flat rents and the smells that come from people\
who work hard and live in poor places and eat badly cooked strong food.\
But that is not my fault. It is life. And if you believe that your and\
your romancers\'92 tawdry imaginings are better than life--well, you may\
not be so wise or so exalted as you fancy.\
\
The upshot of our inspecting places to live and haggling over prices\
was that we took a flat in the best quarter of Passaic--the top and\
in those elevatorless days the cheapest flat in the house. We were to\
pay forty dollars a month--a stiff rent that caused excitement in our\
neighborhood and set my mother and her father to denouncing us as a\
pair of fools bent upon ruin. I thought so, myself. But I could have\
denied Edna nothing at that time, and I made up my mind that by working\
harder than ever at the railway office I would compel another raise.\
When I told my mother about this secret resolve of mine, she said:\
\
\'93If you do get more money, Godfrey, don\'92t tell Edna. She\'92s a fool.\
She\'92ll keep your nose to the grindstone all your life if you ain\'92t\
careful. It takes a better money-maker than you\'92re likely to be to hold\
up against that kind of a woman.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, she\'92s like all girls,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93That\'92s just it,\'94 replied my mother. \'93That\'92s why I ain\'92t got no use for\
women. Look what poor managers they are. Look how they idle and waste\
and run into debt.\'94\
\
\'93But there\'92s a lot to be said against the men, too. Saloons, for\
instance.\'94\
\
\'93And talkin\'92 politics with loafers,\'94 said my father\'92s wife bitterly.\
\
\'93I guess the trouble with men and women is they\'92re too human,\'94 said I,\
who had inherited something of the philosopher from my father. \'93And,\
mother, a man\'92s got to get married--and he\'92s got to marry a woman.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I suppose he has,\'94 she grudgingly assented. \'93Mighty poor\
providers most of the men is, and mighty poor use the women make of\
what little the men brings home. But about you and Edny Wheatlands--\
You ought to do better\'92n her, Godfrey. You\'92re caught by her looks and\
her style and her education. None of them things makes a good wife.\'94\
\
\'93I certainly wouldn\'92t marry a girl that didn\'92t have them--all three.\'94\
\
\'93But there\'92s something more,\'94 insisted mother.\
\
\'93One woman can\'92t have everything,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93No, but she can have what I mean--and she\'92s not much good to a man\
without it. If you\'92re set on marrying her wait till _you\'92re_ ready,\
anyhow. _She_ never will be.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean, mother?\'94\
\
\'93Wait till you\'92ve got money in the savings bank. Wait till you\'92ve got\
used to having money. Then maybe you\'92ll be able to put a bit on a\
spendthrift wife even if you are crazy about her. You\'92re making a wrong\
start with her, Godfrey. You\'92re giving her the upper hand, and that\'92s\
bad for women like her--mighty bad.\'94\
\
It was from my mother that I get my ability at business. She and I\
often had sensible talks, and her advice started me right in the\
railroad office and kept me right until I knew my way. So I did not\
become angry at her plain speaking, but appreciated its good sense,\
even though I thought her prejudiced against my Edna. However, I had\
not the least impulse to put off the marriage. My one wish was to\
hasten it. Never before or since was time so leisurely. But the day\
dragged itself up at last, and we were married in church, at what\
seemed to us then enormous expense. There was a dinner afterward at\
which everyone ate and drank too much--a coarse and common scene which\
I will spare gentle reader. Edna and I went up to New York City for a\
Friday to Monday honeymoon. But we were back to spend Sunday night in\
our grand forty-dollar flat. On Monday morning I went to work again--a\
married man, an important person in the community.\
\
Never has any height I have attained or seen since equalled the\
grandeur of that forty-dollar flat. My common sense tells me that it\
was a small and poor affair. I remember, for example, that the bathroom\
was hardly big enough to turn round in. I recall that I have sat by the\
window in the parlor and without rising have reached a paper on a table\
at the other end of the room. But these hard facts in no way interfere\
with or correct the flat as my imagination persists in picturing\
it. What vistas of rooms!--what high ceilings--what woodwork--and\
plumbing!--and what magnificent furniture! Edna\'92s father, in a moment\
of generosity, told her he would pay for the outfitting of the\
household. And being in the undertaking business he could get discounts\
on furniture and even on kitchen utensils. Edna did the selecting.\
I thought everything wonderful and, as I have said, my imagination\
refuses to recreate the place as it actually was. But I recall that\
there was a brave show of red and of plush, and we all know what that\
means. Whether her \'93Lady Book\'94 had miseducated her or her untrained\
eyes, excited by the gaudiness she saw when she went shopping, had\
beguiled her from the counsels of the \'93Lady Book,\'94 I do not know. But I\
am sure, as I recall red and plush, that our first home was the typical\
horror inhabited by the extravagant working-class family.\
\
No matter. There we were in Arcadia. For a time her restless soaring\
fancy, wearied perhaps by its audacious flight to this lofty perch\
of red and plush and forty dollars a month, folded its wings and\
was content. For a time her pride and satisfaction in the luxurious\
newness overcame her distaste and disdain and moved her to keep things\
spotless. I recall the perfume of cleanness that used to delight my\
nostrils at my evening homecoming, and then the intoxicating perfume of\
Edna herself--the aroma of healthy young feminine beauty. We loved each\
other, simply, passionately, in the old-fashioned way. With the growth\
of intelligence, with the realization on the part of men that her keep\
is a large part of the reason in the woman\'92s mind if not in her heart\
for marrying and loving, there has come a decline and decay of the\
former reverence and awe of man toward woman. Also, the men nowadays\
know more about the mystery of woman, know everything about it, where\
not so many years ago a pure woman was to a man a real religious\
mystery. Her physical being, the clothes she wore underneath, the\
supposedly sweet and clean thoughts, nobler than his, that dwelt in the\
temple of her soul--these things surrounded a girl with an atmosphere\
of thrilling enigma for the youth who won from her lips and from the\
church the right to explore.\
\
All that has passed, or almost passed. I am one of those who believe\
that what has come, or, rather, is coming, to take its place is\
better, finer, nobler. But the old order had its charm. What a charm\
for me!--who had never known any woman well, who had dreamed of her\
passionately but purely and respectfully. There was much of pain--of\
shyness, fear of offending her higher nature, uneasiness lest I should\
be condemned and cast out--in those early days of married life. But\
it was a sweet sort of pain. And when we began to understand each\
other--to be human, though still on our best behavior--when we found\
that we were congenial, were happy together in ways undreamed of, life\
seemed to be paying not like the bankrupt it usually is when the time\
for redeeming its promises comes but like a benevolent prodigal, like\
a lottery whose numbers all draw capital prizes. I admit the truth of\
much the pessimists have to say against Life. But one thing I must\
grant it. When in its rare generous moments it relents, it does know\
how to play the host at the feast--how to spread the board, how to fill\
the flagons and to keep them filled, how to scatter the wreaths and\
the garlands, how to select the singers and the dancers who help the\
banqueters make merry. When I remember my honeymoon, I almost forgive\
you, Life, for the shabby tricks you have played me.\
\
Now I can conceive a honeymoon that would last on and on, not in the\
glory and feverish joy of its first period, but in a substantial and\
satisfying human happiness. But not a honeymoon with a wife who is no\
more fitted to be a wife than the office boy is fitted to step in and\
take the president\'92s job. Patience, gentle reader! I know how this\
sudden shriek of discord across the amorous strains of the honeymoon\
music must have jarred your nerves. But be patient and I will explain.\
\
Except ourselves, every other family in the house, in the neighborhood,\
had at least one servant. We had none. If Edna had been at all\
economical we might have kept a cook and pinched along. But Edna spent\
carelessly all the money I gave her, and I gave her all there was. A\
large part of it went for finery for her personal adornment, trash of\
which she soon tired--much of it she disliked as soon as it came home\
and she tried it on without the saleslady to flatter and confuse. I--in\
a good-natured way, for I really felt perfectly good-humored about\
it--remonstrated with her for letting everybody rob her, for getting so\
little for her money. She took high ground. Such things were beneath\
her attention. If I had wanted a wife of that dull, pinch-penny kind\
I\'92d certainly not have married her, a talented, educated woman, bent\
on improving her mind and her position in the world. And that seemed\
reasonable. Still, the money was going, the bills were piling up, and I\
did not know what to do.\
\
And--she did the cooking. I think I have already said that she had\
not learned to cook. How she and her mother expected her to get along\
as a poor clerk\'92s wife I can\'92t imagine. The worst of it was, she\
believed she could cook. That is the way with women. They look down on\
housekeeping, on the practical side of life, as too coarse and low to\
be worthy their attention. They say all that sort of thing is easy, is\
like the toil of a day laborer. They say anybody could do it. And they\
really believe so. Men, no matter how high their position, weary and\
bore themselves every day, because they must, with routine tasks beside\
which dishwashing has charm and variety. Yet women shirk their proper\
and necessary share of life\'92s burden, pretending that it is beneath\
them.\
\
Edna, typical woman, thought she could cook and keep house because\
she, so superior, could certainly do inferior work if she chose. But\
after that first brief spurt of enthusiasm, of daily conference with\
the \'93Lady Book\'92s Complete Housekeeper\'92s Guide,\'94 the flat was badly\
kept--was really horribly kept--was worse than either her home or\
mine before we had been living there many months. It took on much the\
same odor. It looked worse, as tawdry finery, when mussy and dirty,\
is more repulsive than a plain toilet gone back. I did not especially\
mind that. But her cooking-- I had not been accustomed to anything\
especially good in the way of cooking. Mother was the old-fashioned\
fryer, and you know those fryers always served the vegetables soggy. I\
could have eaten exceedingly poor stuff without complaining or feeling\
like complaining. But the stuff she was soon flinging angrily upon the\
slovenly table I could not eat. She ate it, enough of it to keep alive,\
and it didn\'92t seem to do her any harm. How many women have you known\
who were judges of things to eat? Do you understand how women continue\
to eat the messes they put into their pretty mouths, and keep alive?\
\
I could not eat Edna\'92s cooking. I ate bread, cold meats and the like\
from the delicatessen shop. When the meal happened to be of her own\
preparing I dropped into the habit of slipping away after a pretense\
at eating, to get breakfast or dinner or supper in a restaurant--the\
cheapest kind of restaurant, but I ate there with relish. And never\
once did I murmur to Edna. I loved her too well; also, I am by nature a\
tolerant, even-tempered person, hating strife, avoiding the harsh word.\
In fact, my timidity in that respect has been my chief weakness, has\
cost me dear again and again. But----\
\
After ten months of married life Edna fell ill. All you married men\
will prick up your ears at that. Why is it that bread winners somehow\
contrive to keep on their feet most of the time, little though they\
know as to caring for their health, reckless though they are in\
eating and drinking? Why is it that married women--unless they have\
to work--spend so much time in sick bed or near it? They say we in\
America have more than nine times as many doctors proportionately to\
population as any other country. The doctors live off of our women--our\
idle, overeating, lazy women who will not work, who will not walk,\
who are always getting something the matter with them. Of course the\
doctors--parasites upon parasites--fake up all kinds of lies, many of\
them malicious slanders against the husbands, to excuse their patients\
and to keep them patients. But what is the truth?\
\
Edna, who read all the time she was not plotting to get acquainted with\
our neighbors--they looked down upon us and wished to have nothing to\
do with us--Edna who ate quantities of candy between meals and ate at\
meals rich things she bought of confectioners and bakers--Edna fell ill\
and frightened me almost out of my senses. I understand it now. But I\
did not understand then. I believed, as do all ignorant people--both\
the obviously ignorant and the ignorant who pass for enlightened--I\
believed sickness to be a mysterious accident, like earthquakes and\
lightning strokes, a hit-or-miss blow from nowhere in particular. So I\
was all sympathy and terror.\
\
She got well. She looked as well as ever. But she said she was not\
strong. \'93And Godfrey, we simply have got to keep a girl. I\'92ve borne up\
bravely. But I can\'92t stand it any longer. You see for yourself, the\
rough work and the strain of housekeeping are too much for me.\'94\
\
\'93Very well,\'94 said I. The bills, including the doctor\'92s and drug bills,\
were piling up. We were more than a thousand dollars in debt. But I\
said: \'93Very well. You are right.\'94 We men do not realize that there\
are two distinct and equal expressions of strength. The strength of\
bulk, that is often deceptive in that it looks stronger than it is; the\
strength of fiber, that is always deceptive in that it is stronger than\
it looks. In a general way, man has the strength of bulk, woman the\
strength of fiber. So man looks on woman\'92s appearance of fragility and\
fancies her weak and himself the stronger. I looked at Edna, and said:\
\'93Very well. We must have a girl to help.\'94\
\
I shan\'92t linger upon this part of my story. I am tempted to linger,\
but, after all, it is the commonplace of American life, familiar to\
all, though understood apparently by only a few. Why do more than\
ninety per cent of our small business men fail? Why are the savings\
banks accounts of our working classes a mere fraction of those of the\
working classes of other countries? And so on, and so on. But I see\
your impatience, gentle reader, with these matters so \'93inartistic.\'94 We\
sank deeper and deeper in debt. Edna\'92s health did not improve. The girl\
we hired had lived with better class people; she despised us, shirked\
her work, and Edna did not know how to manage her. If the head of the\
household is incompetent and indifferent, a servant only aggravates the\
mess, and the more servants the greater the mess. All Edna\'92s interest\
was for her music, her novels, her social advancement, and her dreams\
of being a grand lady. These dreams had returned with increased power;\
they took complete possession of her. They soured her disposition,\
made her irritable, usually blue or cross, only at long intervals\
loving and sweet. No, perhaps the dreams were not responsible.\
Perhaps--probably--the real cause was the upset state of her health\
through the absurd idle life she led. Idle and lonely. For she would\
not go with whom she could, she could not go with whom she would.\
\
\'93I\'92m sick of sitting alone,\'94 said she. \'93No wonder I can\'92t get well.\'94\
\
\'93Let\'92s go back near the old folks,\'94 suggested I. \'93Our friends won\'92t\
come to see us in this part of the town. They feel uncomfortable.\'94\
\
\'93I should think they would!\'94 cried she. \'93And if they came I\'92d see to it\
that they were so uncomfortable that they would never come again.\'94\
\
I worked hard. My salary went up to fifteen hundred, to two thousand,\
to twenty-five hundred. \'93Now,\'94 said Edna, \'93perhaps you\'92ll get hands\
that won\'92t look like a laboring man\'92s. How can I hope to make nice\
friends when I\'92ve a husband with broken finger nails?\'94\
\
Our expenses continued to outrun my salary, but I was not especially\
worried, for I began to realize that I had the money-making talent.\
Three children were born; only the first--Margot--lived. Looking back\
upon those six years of our married life, I see after the first year\
only a confused repellent mess of illness, nurses, death, doctors,\
quarrels with servants, untidy rooms and clothes, slovenly, peevish\
wife, with myself watching it all in a dazed, helpless way, thinking it\
must be the normal, natural order of domestic life--which, indeed, it\
is in America--and wondering where and how it was to end.\
\
I recall going home one afternoon late, to find Edna yawning\
listlessly over some book in a magazine culture series. Her hair hung\
every which way, her wrapper was torn and stained. Her skin had the\
musty look that suggests unpleasant conditions both without and within.\
Margot, dirty, pimply from too much candy, sat on the floor squalling.\
\
\'93Take the child away,\'94 cried Edna, at sight of me. \'93I thought you\'92d\
never come. A little more of this and I\'92ll kill myself. What is there\
to live for, anyhow?\'94\
\
Silent and depressed, I took Margot for a walk. And as I wandered along\
sadly I was full of pity for Edna, and felt that somehow the blame was\
wholly mine for the wretched plight of our home life.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
When I was twenty-eight and Edna twenty-three, I had a series of rapid\
promotions which landed me in New York in the position of assistant\
traffic superintendent. My salary was eight thousand a year.\
\
It so happened--coincidence and nothing else--that those eighteen\
months of quick advance for me also marked a notable change in Edna.\
\
There are some people--many people--so obsessed of the know-it-all\
vanity that they can learn nothing. Nor are all these people preachers,\
doctors, and teachers, gentle reader. Then there is another species\
who pretend to know all, who are chary of admitting to learning or\
needing to learn anything, however small, yet who behind their pretense\
toil at improving themselves as a hungry mouse gnaws at the wall of\
the cheese box. Of this species was Edna. As she was fond of being\
mysterious about her thoughts and intentions, she never told me what\
set her going again after that long lethargy. Perhaps it was some woman\
whom she had a sudden opportunity thoroughly to study, some woman who\
knew and lived the ideas Edna had groped for in vain. Perhaps it was\
a novel she read or articles in her magazines. It doesn\'92t matter. I\
never asked her; I had learned that wild horses would not drag from her\
a confession of where she had got an idea, because such a confession\
would to her notion detract from her own glory. However, the essential\
fact is that she suddenly roused and set to work as she had never\
worked before--went at it like a prospector who, after toiling now\
hard and now discouragedly for years, strikes by accident a rich vein\
of gold. Edna showed in every move that she not hoped, not believed,\
but knew she was at last on the right track. She began to take care,\
scrupulous care, of her person--the minute intelligent care she has\
ever since been expanding and improving upon, has never since relaxed,\
and never will relax. Also she began to plan and to move definitely\
in the matter of taking care of Margot--to look after her speech, her\
manners, her food, her person, especially, perhaps, the last. Margot\'92s\
teeth, Margot\'92s hair, Margot\'92s walk, Margot\'92s feet and hands and skin,\
the shape of her nose, the set of her ears--all these things she talked\
about and fussed with as agitatedly as about her own self.\
\
Edna became a crank on the subject of food--what is called a crank\
by the unthinking, of whom, by the way, I was to my lasting regret\
one until a few years ago. For a year or two her moves in this\
important direction were blundering, intermittent, and not always\
successful--small wonder when there is really no reliable information\
to be had, the scientists being uncertain and the doctors grossly\
ignorant. But gradually she evolved and lived upon a \'93beauty diet.\'94\
Margot, of course, had to do the same. She took exercises morning and\
night, took long and regular walks for the figure and skin and to put\
clearness and brightness into the eyes. I believe she and Margot, with\
occasional lapses, keep up their regimen to this day.\
\
The house was as slattern as ever. The diet and comfort and health\
of the family bread-winner were no more the subject of thought and\
care than--well, than the next husband\'92s to his wife. She gave some\
attention--intelligent and valuable attention, I cheerfully concede--to\
improving my speech, manners, and dress. But beyond that the revolution\
affected only her and her daughter. Them it affected amazingly. In\
three or four months the change in their appearance was literally\
beyond belief. Edna\'92s beauty and style came back--no, burst forth in an\
entirely new kind of radiance and fascination. As for little Margot,\
she transformed from homeliness, from the scrawny pasty look of bad\
health, from bad temper, into as neat and sweet and pretty a little\
lady as could be found anywhere.\
\
You, gentle reader, who are ever ready to slop over with some\
kind of sentimentality because in your shallowness you regard\
sentimentality--not sentiment, for of that you know nothing, but\
sentimentality--as the most important thing in the world, just as\
a child regards sickeningly rich cake as the finest food in the\
world--you, gentle reader, have already made up your mind why Edna\
thus suddenly awakened, or, rather, reawakened. \'93Aha,\'94 you are saying.\
\'93Served him good and right. She found some one who appreciated her.\'94\
That guess of yours shows how little you know about Edna or the Edna\
kind of human being. The people who do things in this world, except in\
our foolish American novels, do because they must. They may do better\
or worse under the influence of love, which is full as often a drag as\
a spur. But they do not _do_ because of love. I shall not argue this. I\
shrink from gratuitously inviting an additional vial of wrath from the\
ladies, who resent being told how worthless they in their indolence and\
self-complacence permit themselves to be and how small a positive part\
they now play in the world drama. I should have said nothing at all\
about the matter, were it not that I wish to be strictly just to Edna,\
and she, being wholly the ambitious woman, has always had and still has\
a deep horror of scandal, intrigue, irregularity, and unconventionality\
of every sort.\
\
It was necessary that we move to a place more convenient to my\
business headquarters in New York City. A few weeks after I got the\
eight thousand a year, Edna, and little Margot and I went to Brooklyn\
to live--took a really charming house in Bedford Avenue, with large\
grounds around it. And once more we were happy. It seemed to me we had\
started afresh.\
\
And we had.\
\
\
\
\
II\
\
\
Why did we go to Brooklyn?\
\
By the time Edna and I had been married six years I learned many things\
about her inmost self. I was not at all analytic or critical as to\
matters at home. I used my intelligence in my own business; I assumed\
that my wife had intelligence and that she used it in her business--her\
part of our joint business. I believed the reason her part of it went\
badly was solely the natural conditions of life beyond her control. A\
railroad, a factory could be run smoothly; a family and a household\
were different matters. And I admired my wife as much as I loved her,\
and regarded her as a wonderful woman, which, indeed, in certain\
respects she was.\
\
But I had discovered in her several weaknesses. Some of these I knew;\
others I did not permit myself to know that I knew. For example, I\
was perfectly aware that she was not so truthful as one might be. But\
I did not let myself admit that she was not always unconscious of\
her own deviations from the truth. I had gained enough experience of\
life to learn that lying is practically a universal weakness. So I\
did not especially mind it in her, often found it amusing. I had not\
then waked up to the fact that, as a rule, women systematically lie to\
their husbands about big things and little, and that those women who\
profess to be too proud to lie, do their lying by indirections, such as\
omissions, half truths, and misleading silences. I am not criticising.\
Self-respect, real personal pride, I have discovered in spite of the\
reading matter of all kinds about the past, is a modern development,\
is still in embryo; and those of us who profess to be the proudest are\
either the most ignorant of ourselves or the most hypocritical.\
\
But back to my acquaintance with my wife\'92s character. When I told her\
we should have to live nearer my work, my new work, than Passaic, she\
promptly said:\
\
\'93Let\'92s go to Brooklyn.\'94\
\
\'93Why not to New York?\'94 said I. \'93At least until I get thoroughly\
trained, I want to be close to the office.\'94\
\
\'93But there\'92s Margot,\'94 said she. \'93Margot must have a place to play in.\
And we couldn\'92t afford such a place in New York. I can\'92t let her run\
about the streets or go to public schools. She\'92d pick up all sorts of\
low, coarse associates and habits.\'94\
\
\'93Then let\'92s go to some town opposite--across the Hudson. If we can\'92t\
live on Manhattan Island, and I think you\'92re right about Margot, why,\
let\'92s live where living is cheap. We ought to be saving some money.\'94\
\
\'93I hate these Jersey towns,\'94 said Edna petulantly. \'93I don\'92t think\
Margot would get the right sort of social influences in them.\'94\
\
As soon as she said \'93social influences\'94 I should have understood the\
whole business. The only person higher up on the social ladder with\
whom Edna had been able to scrape intimate acquaintance in Passaic was\
a dowdy, tawdry chatterbox of a woman--I forget her name--who talked\
incessantly of the fashionable people she knew in Brooklyn--how she had\
gone there a stranger, had joined St. Mary\'92s Episcopal Church, and had\
at once become a social favorite, invited to \'93the very best houses,\
my dear; such lovely homes,\'94 and associated with \'93the most charming\
cultured people,\'94 and so on and on--you know the rest of the humbug.\
\
Now, one of the discoveries about my wife which I but half understood\
and made light of, had been that she was mad, literally mad, on the\
subject of social climbing. That means she was possessed of the disease\
imported into this country from England, where it has raged for upward\
of half a century--the disease of being bent upon associating by hook\
or by crook with people whose strongest desire seems to be not to\
associate with you. This plague does not spare the male population--by\
no means. But it rages in and ravages the female population almost to\
a woman. Our women take incidental interest or no interest in their\
homes, in their husbands, in their children. Their hearts are centered\
upon social position, and, of course, the money-squandering necessary\
to attaining or to keeping it. The women who are \'93in\'94 spend all their\
time, whatever they may seem to be about, in spitting upon and kicking\
the faces of the women who are trying to get \'93in.\'94 The women who are\
trying to get \'93in\'94 spend their whole time in smiling and cringing\
and imploring and plotting and, when it seems expedient, threatening\
and compelling. Probe to the bottom--if you have acuteness enough,\
which you probably haven\'92t--probe to the bottom any of the present-day\
activities of the American woman, I care not what it may be, and you\
will discover the bacillus of social position biting merrily away\
at her. If she goes to church or to a lecture or a concert--if she\
goes calling or stays at home--if she joins a suffrage movement or a\
tenement reform propaganda, or refuses to join--if she dresses noisily\
or plainly--if she shuns society or seeks it, if she keeps house or\
leaves housekeeping to servants, roaches, and mice--if she cares for or\
neglects her children--if she pets her husband or displaces him with\
another--no matter what she does, it is at the behest of the poison\
flowing through brain and vein from the social-position bacillus. She\
thinks by doing whatever she does she will somehow make her position\
more brilliant or less insecure, or, having no position at all, will\
gain one.\
\
And the men? They pay the bills. Sometimes reluctantly, again eagerly;\
sometimes ignorantly, again with full knowledge. The men--they pay the\
bills.\
\
Now you know better far than I knew at the time why our happy little\
family went to Brooklyn, took the house in Bedford Avenue which we\
could ill afford if we were to save any money, and joined St. Mary\'92s.\
\
A couple of years after we were married my wife stopped me when I was\
telling her what had happened at the office that day, as was my habit.\
\'93You ought to leave all those things outside when you come home,\'94 said\
she.\
\
She had read this in a book somewhere, I guess. It was a new idea to\
me. \'93Why should I?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Home is a place for happiness, with all the sordidness shut out,\'94\
explained she. \'93Those sordid things ought not to touch our life\
together.\'94\
\
This sounded all right. \'93It seemed to me,\'94 stammered I, apologetically,\
\'93that my career, the way I was getting on, that our bread and butter--\
Well, I thought we ought to kind of talk it over together.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I do sympathize with you,\'94 said, or rather quoted, she. \'93But my\
place is to soothe and smooth away the cares of business. You ought to\
try not to think of them at home.\'94\
\
\'93But what _would_ I think about?\'94 cried I, much perplexed. \'93Why, my\
business is all I\'92ve got. It\'92s the most important thing in the world to\
us. It means our living. At least that\'92s the way the thing looks to me.\'94\
\
\'93You ought to think at home about the higher side of life--the\
intellectual side.\'94\
\
\'93But my business _is_ my intellectual side,\'94 I said. \'93And I can\'92t for\
the life of me see why thinking about things that don\'92t advance us and\
don\'92t pay the bills is better than thinking about things that do.\'94 It\
seemed to me that this looking on my business as something to be left\
on the mud-scraper at the entrance indicated a false idea of it got\
somewhere. So I added somewhat warmly: \'93There\'92s nothing low or bad\
about my business.\'94 And that was the truth at the time.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know anything about it,\'94 replied she with the gentle patience\
of her superior refinement and education. \'93And I don\'92t want to know.\
Those things don\'92t interest me. And I think, Godfrey\'94--very sweetly,\
with her cheek against mine--\'93the reason husbands and wives often grow\
apart is that the husband gives his whole mind to his business and\
doesn\'92t develop the higher side of his nature--the side that appeals to\
a woman and satisfies her.\'94\
\
This touched my sense of humor mildly. \'93My father gives his mind to one\
of those high sides,\'94 said I, \'93and we nearly starved to death.\'94\
\
\'93Your father!\'94 exclaimed she in derisive disgust.\
\
\'93My father,\'94 said I cheerfully, \'93he does nothing but read, talk, and\
think politics.\'94\
\
\'93Politics! _That_ isn\'92t on the higher side. Women don\'92t care anything\
about _that_.\'94\
\
\'93Well, what do they care about?\'94 I inquired.\
\
\'93About music and literature--and those artistic things.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, those things are all right,\'94 said I. \'93But I don\'92t see that it\
takes any more brains or any better brains to paint a picture or sing a\
song or write a novel than it does to run a railroad--or to plan one.\
If you\'92d try to understand business, dear,\'94 I urged, \'93you might find\
it as interesting and as intellectual as anything that doesn\'92t help us\
make a living. Anyhow, I\'92ve simply got to give my brains to my work.\
You go ahead and attend to the higher side for the family. I\'92ll stick\
to the job that butters the bread and keeps the rain off.\'94\
\
She was patient with me, but I saw she didn\'92t approve. However, as I\
knew she\'92d approve still less if I failed to provide for her and the\
two young ones--there were two at that time--I let the matter drop and\
held to the common-sense course. I hadn\'92t the faintest notion of the\
seriousness of that little talk of ours. And it was well I hadn\'92t, for\
to have made her realize her folly I\'92d have had to start in and educate\
her--uneducate her and then re\'ebducate her. I don\'92t blame the women. I\
feel sorry for them. When I hear them talk about the lack of sympathy\
between themselves and American men, about the low ideals and the\
sordid talk the men indulge in, how dull it is, how different from the\
inspiring, cultured talk a woman hears among the aristocrats abroad,\
said aristocrats being supported in helpless idleness throughout their\
useless lives, often by hard-earned American dollars--when I hear this\
pitiful balderdash from fair lips, I grow sad. The American woman\
fancies she is growing away from the American man. The truth is that\
while she is sitting still, playing with a lapful of the artificial\
flowers of fake culture, like a poor doodle-wit, the American man is\
growing away from her. She knows nothing of value; she can do nothing\
of value. She has nothing to offer the American man but her physical\
charms, for he has no time or taste for playing with artificial flowers\
when the world\'92s important work is to be done. So the poor creature\
grows more isolated, more neglected, less respected, and less sought,\
except in a physical way. And all the while she hugs to her bosom the\
delusion that she is the great soul high sorrowful. The world moves;\
many are the penalties for the nation or the race or the sex that does\
not move with it, or does not move quickly enough. I feel sorry for the\
American woman--unless she has a father who will leave her rich or a\
husband who will give her riches.\
\
I feel some of my readers saying that I must have been most unfortunate\
in the women I have known. Perhaps. But may it not be that those\
commiserating readers have been rarely fortunate in their feminine\
acquaintances?--or in lack of insight?\
\
Now you probably not only know why we went to Brooklyn, but also\
what we did after we got there. I have not forgotten my promise to\
gentle reader. I shall not linger many moments in Brooklyn. True, it\
is superior to Passaic, at least to the part of Passaic in which I\
constrained gentle reader to tarry a minute or two. But it is still far\
from the promised heights.\
\
My wife owes a vast deal to Brooklyn. As she haughtily ignores the\
debt, would deny it if publicly charged, I shall pay it for her.\
Brooklyn was her finishing school. It made her what she is.\
\
In the last year or so we spent in Passaic there had been, as I have\
hinted, a marked outward change in all three of us. The least, or\
rather the least abrupt, change had been in me. Associated in business\
with a more prosperous and better-dressed and better-educated class of\
men, I had gradually picked up the sort of knowledge a man needs to fit\
himself for the inevitably changing social conditions accompanying a\
steady advance in material prosperity. I was as quick to learn one kind\
of useful thing as another. And just as I learned how to fill larger\
and larger positions and how to make money out of the chances that\
come to a man situated where money is to be made, so I learned how to\
dress like a man of the better class, how to speak a less slangy and\
a less ungrammatical English, how to use my mind in thinking and in\
discussing a thousand subjects not directly related to my business.\
\
If my wife had been interested in any of the important things of the\
world, I could have been of the greatest assistance to her and she\
to me. And we should have grown ever closer together in sympathetic\
companionship. But although she had a good mind--a superior mind--she\
cared about nothing but the things that interest foolish women and\
still more foolish men--for a man who cares about splurge and show and\
social position and such nonsense is less excusable, is more foolish,\
than a woman of the same sort. Women have the excuse of lack of serious\
occupation, but what excuse has a man? Still, she was not idle--not for\
a minute. She was, on the contrary, in her way as busy as I. From time\
to time she would say to me enigmatically: \'93You don\'92t appreciate it,\
but I am preparing myself to help you fill the station your business\
ability will win us a chance at.\'94 It seemed to me that I was doing\
that alone. For what was necessary to fill that station but higher and\
higher skill as a man of affairs?\
\
When we had made our entry in Brooklyn and had seated ourselves in\
the state in Bedford Avenue which she had decided for, she showed\
that she felt immensely proud of herself. We took the house furnished\
throughout--nicely furnished in a substantial way, for it had been the\
home of one of the old Brooklyn mercantile families.\
\
\'93It\'92s good enough to start with,\'94 said she, casting a critical glance\
round the sober, homelike dining room. \'93I shan\'92t make any changes till\
I look about me.\'94\
\
\'93We couldn\'92t be better off,\'94 said I. \'93Everything is perfectly\
comfortable.\'94 And in fact neither she nor I had ever before known what\
comfort was. Looking at that house--merely looking at it and puzzling\
out the uses of the various things to us theretofore unknown--was about\
as important in the way of education as learning to read is to a child.\
\
\'93It\'92s good enough for Brooklyn,\'94 said she. She regarded me with her\
patient, tender expression of the superior intelligence. \'93You haven\'92t\
much imagination or ambition, Godfrey,\'94 she went on. \'93But fortunately\
_I_ have. And do be careful not to betray us before the servants I\'92m\
engaging.\'94\
\
The show part of the house continued to look about as it had when we\
took possession. But the living part went to pieces rapidly. We had\
many servants. We spent much money--so much that, if I had not been\
speculating in various ways, we should have soon gone under. But the\
results were miserably poor. My wife left everything to her servants\
and devoted herself to her social career. The ex-Brooklyn society woman\
at Passaic had not deceived her. No sooner had she joined St. Mary\'92s\
than she began to have friends--friends of a far higher social rank\
than she had ever even seen at close range before. They were elegant\
people indeed--the wives of the heads of departments in big stores, the\
families of bank officers and lawyers and doctors. There were even a\
few rather rich people. My wife was in ecstasy for a year or two. And\
she improved rapidly in looks, in dress, in manners, in speech, in all\
ways except in disposition and character.\
\
Except in disposition and character. As we grow older and rise in the\
world, there is always a deterioration both in disposition and in\
character. A man\'92s disposition grows sharper through dealing with,\
and having to deal sharply with, incompetence. The character tends\
to harden as he is forced to make the unpleasant and often not too\
scrupulous moves necessary to getting himself forward toward success.\
Also, the way everyone tries to use a successful man makes him more and\
more acute in penetrating to the real motives of his fellow beings,\
more and more inclined to take up men for what he can get out of them\
and drop them when he has squeezed out all the advantage--in brief,\
to treat them precisely as they treat him. But the whole object in\
having a home, a wife, a family, is defeated if the man has not there\
a something that checks the tendencies to cynicism and coldness which\
active life not merely encourages but even compels.\
\
There was no occasion for Edna\'92s becoming vixenish and hard. It was\
altogether due to the idiotic and worthless social climbing. She had\
a swarm of friends, yet not a single friend. She cultivated people\
socially, and they cultivated her, not for the natural and kindly and\
elevating reasons, but altogether for the detestable purposes of that\
ghastly craze for social position. Edna was bitter against me for a\
long time, never again became fully reconciled, because I soon flatly\
refused to have anything to do with it.\
\
\'93They will think there\'92s something wrong about you, and about me, if\
you don\'92t come with me,\'94 pleaded she.\
\
\'93I need my strength for my business,\'94 said I. \'93And what do I care\
whether they think well or ill of me? They don\'92t give us any money.\'94\
\
\'93You are _so_ sordid!\'94 cried she. \'93Sometimes I\'92m almost tempted to give\
up, and not try to be somebody and to make somebodies of Margot and\
you.\'94\
\
\'93I wish you would,\'94 said I. \'93Why shouldn\'92t we live quietly and mind our\
own business and be happy?\'94\
\
\'93How fortunate it is for Margot that she has a mother with ambition and\
pride!\'94\
\
\'93Well--no matter. But please do get another cook. This one is, if\
anything, worse than the last--except when we have company.\'94\
\
We were forever changing cooks. The food that came on our table was\
something atrocious. I heard the same complaint from all my married\
associates at the office, even from the higher officials who were\
rich men and lived in great state. They, too, had American wives. In\
the markets and shops I saw as I passed along all sorts of attractive\
things to eat, and of real quality. I wondered why we never had those\
things on our table. Heaven knows we spent money enough. The time came\
when I got a clew to the mystery.\
\
One day Edna said: \'93I\'92ve been doing my housekeeping altogether by\
telephone. I think I\'92ll stop it, except on rainy days and when I don\'92t\
feel well.\'94\
\
By telephone! I laughed to myself. No wonder we had poor stuff and\
paid the highest prices for it. I thought a while, then to satisfy\
my curiosity began to ask questions, very cautiously, for Edna was\
extremely touchy, as we all are in matters where in our hearts we know\
we are in the wrong. \'93Do you remember what kind of range we have in our\
kitchen?\'94 I asked.\
\
\'93I?\'94 exclaimed she disgustedly. \'93Certainly not. I haven\'92t been down to\
the kitchen since we first moved into this house. I\'92ve something better\
to do than to meddle with the servants.\'94\
\
\'93Naturally,\'94 said I soothingly. And I didn\'92t let her see how her\
confession amused me. What if a man tried to run his business in that\
fashion! And ordering by telephone! Why, it was an invitation to the\
tradespeople to swindle us in every way. But I said nothing.\
\
As usually either it was bad weather or Edna was not feeling well, or\
was in a rush to keep some social engagement, the ordering for the\
house continued to be done by telephone, when it was not left entirely\
to the discretion of the servants. One morning it so happened that she\
and I left the house at the same time. Said she:\
\
\'93I\'92m on my way to do the marketing. It\'92s a terrible nuisance, and I\
know so little about those things. But it\'92s coming to be regarded as\
fashionable for a woman to do her own marketing. Some of the best\
families--people with their own carriages and servants in livery--some\
of the swellest ladies in Brooklyn do it now. It\'92s a fad from across\
the river.\'94\
\
\'93You must be careful not to overtax yourself,\'94 said I.\
\
And I said it quite seriously, for in those days of my innocence I was\
worried about her, thought her a poor overworked angel, was glad I had\
the money to relieve her from the worst tasks and to leave her free to\
amuse herself and to take care of her health! I had not yet started in\
the direction of ridding myself of the masculine delusion that woman\
is a delicate creature by nature if she happens to be a lady--and of\
course I knew my Edna was a lady through and through. It was many a\
year before I learned the truth--why ladies are always ailing and why\
they can do nothing but wear fine clothes and sit in parlors or in\
carriages when they are not sitting at indigestible food, and amuse\
themselves and pity themselves for being condemned to live with coarse,\
uninteresting American men.\
\
Yes, I was sincere in urging her to take care how she adopted so\
laborious a fad as doing her own marketing. She went on:\
\
\'93If I had a carriage it wouldn\'92t be so bad.\'94\
\
She said this sweetly enough and with no suggestion of reproach. Just\
the sigh of a lady\'92s soul at the hardness of life\'92s conditions. But\
I, loving her, felt as if I were somehow to blame. \'93You shall have a\
carriage before many years,\'94 said I. \'93That\'92s one of the things I\'92ve\
been working for.\'94\
\
She gave me a look that made me feel proud I had her to live for. \'93I\
hope I\'92ll be here to enjoy it,\'94 sighed she.\
\
I walked sad and silent by her side, profoundly impressed and depressed\
by that hint as to her feeble health. I know now it was sheer pretense\
with her, the more easily to manage me and to cover her shortcomings. I\
ought to have realized it then. But what man does? She certainly did\
not look ill, for she was not one of those who were always stuffing\
themselves at teas and lunches, and talked of a walk of five blocks\
as hard exercise! She had learned how to keep health and beauty. What\
intelligence it shows, that she was able to grasp so difficult a\
matter; and what splendid persistence that she was able to carry out a\
mode of life so disagreeable to self-indulgence. If her intelligence\
and her persistence could have been turned to use! Presently we were\
at the butcher shop. I paused in the doorway while she engaged in her\
arduous labor. Here is the conversation:\
\
\'93Good morning, Mr. Toomey.\'94 (Very gracious; the lady speaking to the\
trades person.)\
\
\'93Good morning, ma\'92am.\'94 (Fat little butcher touching cracked and\
broken-nailed hand to hat respectfully.)\
\
\'93That lamb you sent yesterday was very tough.\'94\
\
\'93Sorry, ma\'92am. But those kind of things will happen, you know.\'94 (Most\
flatteringly humble of manner.)\
\
\'93Yes, I know. Do your best. I\'92m sure you try to please. Send me--let me\
see--say, two chickens for broiling. You\'92ll pick out nice ones?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed, ma\'92am. I\'92ll attend to it myself.\'94\
\
\'93And something for the servants. You know what they like.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, ma\'92am. I\'92ll attend to it.\'94\
\
\'93And you\'92ll not overcharge, will you?\'94\
\
\'93I, ma\'92am? I\'92ve been dealing with ladies for twenty years, right here,\
ma\'92am. I never have overcharged.\'94\
\
\'93I know. All the ladies tell me you\'92re honest. I feel safe with you.\
Let me see, there were some other things. But I\'92m in a hurry. The cook\
will tell your boy when he takes what I\'92ve ordered. You\'92ll be sure to\
give me the best?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92d not dare send anything else to _you_, ma\'92am.\'94 (Groveling.)\
\
A gracious smile, a gracious nod, and Edna rejoined me. Innocent as\
I was, and under the spell that blinds the American man where the\
American woman is concerned, I could not but be upset by this example\
of how our house was run--an example that all in an instant brought\
to my mind and enabled me to understand a score, a hundred similar\
examples. There was I, toiling away to make money, earning every dollar\
by the hardest kind of mental labor, struggling to rise, to make our\
fortune, and each day my wife was tossing carelessly out of the windows\
into the street a large part of my earnings. I did not know what to do\
about it.\
\
Edna\'92s next stop was at the grocer\'92s. I had not the courage to halt\
and listen. I knew it would be a repetition of the grotesque interview\
with the butcher. And she undoubtedly a clever woman--alert, improving.\
What a mystery! I went on to my office. That day, without giving my\
acquaintances there an inkling of what was in my mind, I made inquiries\
into how their wives spent the money that went for food--the most\
important item in the spending of incomes under ten or twelve thousand\
a year. In every case the wife or the mother did the marketing by\
telephone. All the men except one took the ignorance and incompetence\
of the management of the household expenses as a matter of course. One\
man grumbled a little. I remember he said: \'93No wonder it\'92s hard for the\
men to save anything. The women waste most of it on the table, paying\
double prices for poor stuff. I tell you, Loring, the American woman\
is responsible for the dishonesty of American commercial life. They\
are always nagging at the man for more and more money to spend, and in\
spending it they tempt the merchants, the clerks, their own servants,\
everyone within range, to become swindlers and thieves.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, nonsense,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92re a pessimist. The American woman is all\
right. Where\'92d you find her equal for intelligence and charm?\'94\
\
\'93She may be intelligent,\'94 said he. \'93She doesn\'92t use it on anything\
worth while, except roping in some poor sucker to put up _for_ her and\
to put up _with_ her. And she may have charm, but not for a man who has\
cut his matrimonial eye teeth.\'94\
\
I laughed at Van Dyck--that was my grumbling friend\'92s name. And I soon\
dropped the subject from my mind. It has never been my habit to waste\
time in thinking about things when the thinking could not possibly\
lead anywhere. You may say I ought to have interfered, forced my wife\
to come to her senses, compelled her to learn her business. Which\
shows that you know little about the nature of the American woman.\
If I had taken that course, she would have hated me, she would have\
done no better, and she would have scorned me as a sordid haggler over\
small sums of money who was trying to spoil with the vulgarities of\
commercial life the beauties of the home. No, I instinctively knew\
enough not to interfere.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
But let us take a long leap forward to the day when I became president\
of the railroad, having made myself a rich man by judicious gambling\
with eight thousand dollars loaned me by father Wheatlands. He was a\
rich man, and in the way to become very rich, and he had no heir but\
Edna after the drowning of her two brothers under a sailboat in Newark\
Bay. Margot was in a fashionable school over in New York. My wife and\
I, still a young couple and she beautiful--my wife and I were as happy\
as any married couple can be where they let each other alone and the\
husband gives the wife all the money she wishes and leaves her free to\
spend it as she pleases.\
\
When I told her of my good fortune, and the sudden and large betterment\
of our finances, she said with a curious lighting of the eyes, a\
curious strengthening of the chin:\
\
\'93Now--for New York!\'94\
\
\'93New York?\'94 said I. \'93What does that mean?\'94\
\
\'93We are going to live in New York,\'94 replied she.\
\
\'93But we do live in New York. Brooklyn is part of New York.\'94\
\
\'93Legally I suppose it is,\'94 replied she. \'93But morally and \'e6sthetically,\
socially, and in every other civilized way, my dear Godfrey, it is part\
of the backwoods. I can hardly wait to get away.\'94\
\
\'93Why, I thought you were happy here!\'94 exclaimed I, marveling, used\
though I was to her keeping her own counsel strictly about the matters\
that most interested her. \'93You\'92ve certainly acted as if you loved it.\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t _mind_ it at first,\'94 conceded she. \'93But for two or three\
years I have _loathed_ it, and everybody that lives in it.\'94\
\
I was amazed at this last sally. \'93Oh, come now, Edna,\'94 cried I, \'93you\'92ve\
got lots of friends here--lots and lots of them.\'94\
\
I was thinking of the dozen or so women whom she called and who called\
her by the first name, women she was with early and late. Women she was\
daily playing bridge with-- Bridge! I have a friend who declares that\
bridge is ruining the American home, and I see his point, but I think\
he doesn\'92t look deep enough. If it weren\'92t bridge it would be something\
else. Bridge is a striking example, but only a single example, of the\
results of feminine folly and idleness that all flow from the same\
cause. However, let us go back to my talk with Edna. She met my protest\
in behalf of her friends with a contemptuous:\
\
\'93I don\'92t know a soul who isn\'92t _frightfully_ common.\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re the same sort of people we are.\'94\
\
\'93Not the same sort that _I_ am,\'94 declared she proudly. \'93And not the\
sort Margot and you are going to be. You\'92ll see. You don\'92t know about\
these things. But fortunately I do.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t seriously mean that you want to leave this splendid old\
house----\'94\
\
\'93Splendid? It\'92s hardly fit to live in. Of course, we had to endure it\
while we were poor and obscure. But now it won\'92t do at all.\'94\
\
\'93And go away from all these people you\'92ve worked so hard to get in\
with--all these friends--go away among strangers. _I_ don\'92t mind. But\
what would _you_ do? How\'92d you pass the days?\'94\
\
\'93These vulgar people bore me to death,\'94 declared she. \'93I\'92ve been\
advancing, if you have stood still. Thank God, _I\'92ve_ got ambition.\'94\
\
\'93Heaven knows they\'92ve never been _my_ friends,\'94 said I. \'93But I must say\
they seem nice enough people, as people go. What\'92s the matter with \'92em?\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re common,\'94 said she with the languor of one explaining when he\
feels he will not be understood. \'93They\'92re tiresome.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll admit they\'92re tiresome,\'94 said I. \'93That\'92s why I\'92ve kept away from\
them. But I doubt if they\'92re more tiresome than people generally. The\
fact is, my dear, people are all tiresome. That\'92s why they can\'92t amuse\
themselves or each other, but have to be amused--have to hire the\
clever people of all sorts to entertain them. Instead of asking people\
here to bore us and to be bored, why not send them seats at a theater\
or orders for a first-class meal at a first-class restaurant?\'94\
\
\'93I suppose you think that\'92s funny,\'94 said my wife. She had no sense of\
humor, and the suggestion of a jest irritated her.\
\
\'93Yes, it does strike me as funny,\'94 I admitted. \'93But there\'92s sense in\
it, too.... I\'92m sure you don\'92t want to abandon your friends here.\
Why make ourselves uncomfortable all over again?\'94 I took a serious\
persuasive tone. \'93Edna, we\'92re beginning to get used to the more stylish\
way of living we took up when we left Passaic and came here to live. Is\
it sensible to branch out again into the untried and the unknown? Will\
we be any wiser or any happier? You can shine as the big star now in\
this circle of friends. You like to run things socially. Here\'92s your\
chance.\'94\
\
\'93How could I get any pleasure out of running things socially in St.\
Mary\'92s?\'94 demanded she. \'93I\'92ve outgrown it. It seems vulgar and common to\
me. It is vulgar and common.\'94\
\
\'93What does that mean?\'94 I asked innocently.\
\
\'93If you don\'92t understand, I can\'92t tell you,\'94 replied she tartly.\
\'93Surely you must see that your wife and your daughter are superior to\
these people round here.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t compare my wife and daughter with other people,\'94 said I. \'93To\
me they\'92re superior to anybody and everybody else in the world. I often\
wish we lived \'92way off in the country somewhere. I\'92m sure we\'92d be\
happier with only each other. We\'92re putting on too much style to suit\
me, even now.\'94\
\
\'93I see you living in the country,\'94 laughed she. \'93You\'92d come down about\
once a week or month.\'94\
\
I couldn\'92t deny the truth in her accusation. I felt it ought to have\
been that my wife and I were so sympathetic, so interested in the same\
things, that we were absorbed in each other. But the facts were against\
it. We really had almost nothing in common. I admired her beauty and\
also her intelligence and energy, though I thought them misdirected.\
She, I think, liked me in the primitive way of a woman with a man. And\
she admired my ability to make money, though she thought it rather a\
low form of intellectual excellence. However, as she found it extremely\
useful, she admired me for it in a way. I have seen much of the\
aristocratic temperament that despises money, but I have yet to see an\
aristocrat who wasn\'92t greedier than the greediest money-grubber--and\
I must say it is hard to conceive anything lower than the spirit\
that grabs the gift and despises the giver. But then, some day, when\
thinking is done more clearly, we shall all see that aristocracy and\
its spirit is the lowest level of human nature, is simply a deep-seated\
survival of barbarism. However, Edna and I appealed to and satisfied\
each other in one way; beyond that our congeniality abruptly ended.\
Looking back, I see now that talking _with_ her was never a pleasure,\
nor was it a pleasure to her to talk _with_ me. I irritated her; she\
bored me.\
\
How rarely in our country do you find a woman who is an interesting\
companion for a man, except as female and male pair or survey the\
prospect of pairing? And it matters not what line of activity the man\
is taking--business, politics, literature, art, philanthropy even. The\
women are eternally talking about their superiority to the business\
man; but do they get along any better with an artist--unless he is\
cultivating the woman for the sake of an order for a picture? Is there\
any line of serious endeavor in which an American woman is interesting\
and helpful and companionable to a man? I can get along very well with\
an artist. I have one friend who is a writer of novels, another who\
is a writer of plays, a third who is a sculptor. They are interested\
in my work, and I in theirs. We talk together on a basis of equal\
interest, and we give each other ideas. Can any American woman say the\
same? I don\'92t inquire anticipating a negative answer. I simply put the\
question. But I suspect the answer would put a pin in the bubble of\
the American woman\'92s pretense of superior culture. She is fooled by\
her vanity, I fear, and by her sex attraction, and by the influence of\
the money her despised father or husband gives her. There\'92s a reason\
why America is notoriously the land of bachelor husbands--and that\
reason is not the one the women and foreign fortune hunters assert.\
The American man lets the case go by default against him, not because\
he couldn\'92t answer, nor yet because he is polite, but _because he is\
indifferent_.\
\
But my wife was talking about her projected assault upon New York. \'93I\
really must be an extraordinary woman,\'94 said she. \'93How I have fought\
all these years to raise myself, with you dragging at me to keep me\
down.\'94\
\
\'93I?\'94 protested her unhappy husband. \'93Why, dear, I\'92ve never opposed you\
in any way. And I\'92ve tried to do what I could to help you. You must\
admit the money\'92s been useful.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you\'92ve never been mean about money,\'94 conceded she. \'93But you don\'92t\
sympathize with a single one of my ideals.\'94\
\
\'93I want you to have whatever you want,\'94 said I. \'93And anything I can do\
to get it for you, or to help you get it, I stand ready to do.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I know, Godfrey, dear,\'94 said she, giving me a long hug and a\
kiss. \'93No woman ever had a more generous husband than I have.\'94\
\
I naturally attached more importance to this burst of enthusiasm then\
than I do now. And it is as well that I was thus simple-minded. How\
little pleasure we would get, to be sure, if, when we are praised\
or loved by anybody because we do that person a kindness, we paused\
to analyze and saw the shallow selfishness of such praise or such\
love. After all, it\'92s only human nature to like those who do as we\
ask them and to dislike those who don\'92t; and I am not quarreling with\
human nature--or with any other of the unchangeable conditions of the\
universe. My own love for Edna--what was it but the natural result of\
my getting what I wanted from her, all I wanted? I really troubled\
myself little about her incompetence and extravagance and craze for\
social position. No doubt to this day I should be-- But I am again\
anticipating.\
\
\'93Generous? Nonsense,\'94 said I. \'93It isn\'92t generous to try to make you\
happy. That\'92s my one chance of being happy myself. A busy man\'92s got to\
have peace at home. If he hasn\'92t he\'92s like a soldier attacked rear and\
front at the same time.\'94\
\
\'93I know you don\'92t care where we live,\'94 she went on. \'93And for Margot\'92s\
sake we\'92ve simply got to move to New York.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you want her to stay at home of nights, instead of living at the\
school. Why didn\'92t you speak of that first?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 cried she. \'93How slow you are! No; for the present, even\
if we do live in New York, I think it best for Margot to keep on\
living at the school. She\'92s barely started there. I want her training\
to be thorough. And while I\'92m learning as fast as I can, I am not\
competent to teach her. I know, of course. But I haven\'92t had the chance\
to practice. So I can\'92t teach her.\'94\
\
\'93Teach her what?\'94 I inquired.\
\
\'93To be a lady--a practical, expert lady,\'94 replied Edna. \'93That\'92s what\
she\'92s going to Miss Ryper\'92s school for. And when she comes out she\'92ll\
be the equal of girls who have generations of culture and breeding\
behind them.\'94\
\
\'93God bless me!\'94 cried I, laughing. \'93This Ryper woman must be a wonder.\'94\
\
\'93She is,\'94 declared Edna. \'93It was a great favor, her letting Margot into\
the school.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I remember,\'94 said I. \'93She couldn\'92t do it until I got two of the\
directors of the road to insist on it. But I guess that was merely a\
bluff of hers to squeeze us for a few hundreds extra.\'94\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 Edna assured me. \'93You are _so_ ignorant, Godfrey. Please\
do be careful not to say those coarse things before people.\'94\
\
\'93As you please,\'94 said I, cheerfully, for I was used to this kind of\
calling down. \'93All the same, the Ryper lady is hot for the dough.\'94\
\
Edna shivered. She detested slang--continued to detest and avoid it\
even after she learned that it was fashionable. \'93Miss Ryper guards\
her list of pupils as their mothers guard their visiting lists,\'94 said\
she. \'93But now she likes Margot. The dear child has been elected to\
the most exclusive fraternity. Every girl in it has to wear hand-made\
underclothes and has to have had at least a father, a grandfather, and\
a great grandfather.\'94 Edna laughed with pride at her own cleverness\
before she went on. \'93Margot came to me when she was proposed, and cried\
as if her little heart would break. She said she didn\'92t know anything\
about her grandfather and great grandfather. But I hadn\'92t forgotten to\
arrange that. I think of everything.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, that was easy enough,\'94 said I. \'93Your grandfather was a tailor and\
mine was in the grocery business like father.\'94\
\
Edna looked round in terror. \'93Sh!\'94 she exclaimed. \'93Servants always\
listen.\'94 She went to the door--we were in the small upstairs sitting\
room--opened it suddenly, looked into the hall, closed the door,\
and returned to a chair nearer the lounge on which I was stretched\
comfortably smoking.\
\
\'93What\'92s the matter?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93No one was there,\'94 said she. \'93Haven\'92t I told you never to speak of--of\
those horrible things?\'94\
\
\'93But Margot----\'94\
\
\'93Margot doesn\'92t know. She must _never_ know! Poor child, she is so\
sensitive, it would make her ill.\'94\
\
I lapsed into gloomy silence. I had not liked the way Edna had been\
acting about her parents and mine ever since we came to Brooklyn. But I\
had been busy, and was averse to meddling.\
\
\'93I gave Margot for the benefit of the girls a genealogy I\'92ve gotten\
up,\'94 she went on. \'93You know all genealogies are more or less faked, and\
I\'92ve no doubt hers is every bit as genuine as those of half the girls\
over there. I fixed ours so that it would take a lot of inquiry to\
expose it. And Margot got into the fraternity.\'94\
\
\'93Are the hand-made underclothes fake too?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh, no. _They_ had to be genuine. I\'92ve never let Margot wear any other\
kind since I learned about those things. There\'92s nothing that gives a\
child such a sense of ladylikeness and superiority as to feel she\'92s\
dressed right from the skin out.\'94\
\
\'93Well, school\'92s a different sort of a place from what it was in our\
day,\'94 said I. The picture my wife had drawn amused me, but I somehow\
did not exactly like it. My mind was too little interested in the\
direction of the things that absorbed Edna for me to be able to put\
into any sort of shape the thoughts vaguely moving about in the\
shadows. \'93I\'92ll bet,\'94 I went on, \'93poor Margot doesn\'92t have as good a\
time as we had.\'94\
\
\'93She\'92d hate that kind of a time,\'94 said Edna.\
\
I laughed and laid my hand in her lap. Her hand stole into it. I\
watched her lovely face--the sweet, dreamy expression. \'93What are you\
thinking?\'94 said I softly, hopeful of romance--what _I_ call romance.\
\
\'93I was thinking how low and awful we used to be,\'94 replied she, \'93and how\
splendidly we are getting away from it.\'94\
\
I laughed, for I was used to cold water on my romance. \'93All the same,\'94\
insisted I, \'93Margot would envy us if she knew.\'94\
\
\'93She\'92d hate it,\'94 Edna repeated. \'93She\'92s going to be an improvement on\
_us_.\'94\
\
\'93Not on you,\'94 I protested.\
\
She looked at me with tender sparkling eyes, the same lovely\
light-brown eyes that had fascinated me as a boy. Brown eyes for a\
woman, always! But they must not be of the heavy commonplace shades of\
brown like a deer\'92s or a cow\'92s. They must have light shades in them,\
tints verging toward blue or green. Said Edna: \'93I\'92m doing my best to\
fit myself. And before I get through, Godfrey, I think I\'92ll go far.\'94\
\
\'93Sure you will,\'94 said I, with no disposition to turn the cold douche\
on _her_ kind of romance. What an idiot I was about her, to be sure! I\
went on: \'93And I\'92ll see that you have the money to grease the toboggan\
slide and make the going easy.\'94\
\
She talked on happily and confidingly: \'93Yes, it\'92s best to leave Margot\
another year as a boarder at Miss Ryper\'92s. By that time we\'92ll be\
established over in New York, and we\'92ll have a proper place for her to\
receive her friends. And perhaps we\'92ll have a few friends of our own.\'94\
\
\'93Swell friends, eh?\'94\
\
\'93Please don\'92t say swell, dear,\'94 corrected she. \'93It\'92s such a common\
word.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve heard _you_ say it,\'94 I protested.\
\
\'93But I don\'92t any more. I\'92ve learned better. And now I\'92ve taught you\
better.\'94\
\
\'93Anything you like. Anybody you like,\'94 said I. When Edna and I were\
together, with our hands clasped, I was always completely under her\
spell. She could do what she pleased with me, so long, of course, as\
she didn\'92t interfere in my end of the firm. And I may add that she\
never did; she hadn\'92t the faintest notion what I was about. They say\
there are thousands of American women in the cities who know their\
husbands\'92 places of business only as street and telephone numbers.\
My wife was one of that kind. Oh, yes, from the standpoint of those\
who insist that business and home should be separate, we were a model\
couple.\
\
\'93There\'92s another matter I want to talk over with you, Godfrey,\'94 she\
went on.\
\
\'93That\'92s a lovely dress you\'92re wearing,\'94 said I. \'93It goes so well with\
your skin and your hair.\'94\
\
She was delighted, and was moved to rise and look at herself in the\
long mirror. She gave herself an approving glance, but not more\
approving than what she saw merited. A long, slim beautiful figure;\
a dress that set it off. A lovely young tip-tilted face, the face of\
a girl with fresh, clear eyes and skin, the whitest, evenest sharp\
teeth--and such hair!--such quantities of hair attractively arranged.\
\
From herself she glanced at me. \'93No one\'92d ever think what we came from,\
would they?\'94 said she fondly and proudly. \'93Oh, Godfrey, it makes me\
so happy that we _look_ the part. We belong where we\'92re going. The\
good blood away back in the family is coming out. And Margot-- I\'92ve\
always called her the little duchess--and she looks it and feels it.\'94\
Dreamily, \'93Maybe she will be some day.\'94\
\
\'93Why, she\'92s a baby,\'94 cried I. For I didn\'92t like to see that my baby was\
growing up.\
\
\'93She\'92s nearly fourteen,\'94 said Edna. She was looking at herself again.\
\'93Would you ever think _I_ had a daughter fourteen years old?\'94 said\
she, making a laughing, saucy face at me.\
\
I got up and kissed her. \'93You don\'92t look as old as you did when I\
married you,\'94 said I, and it was only a slight exaggeration.\
\
When we sat again, she was snuggled into my lap with her head against\
my shoulder. She was immensely fond of being petted. They say this is\
no sign of a loving nature, that cats, the least loving of all pets,\
are fondest of petting. I have no opinion on the subject.\
\
\'93What was it you wanted to talk about?\'94 said I. \'93Money?\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 laughed she.\
\
\'93I supposed so, as that\'92s the only matter in which I have any influence\
in this family.\'94\
\
\'93Come to think of it,\'94 said she, \'93it _is_ money--in a way. It\'92s\
about--our parents.\'94 She gave a deep sigh. \'93Godfrey, they hang over me\
like a nightmare!\'94\
\
Her tragic seriousness amused me. \'93Oh, cheer up,\'94 said I, kissing her.\
\'93They certainly don\'92t fit in with our stylishness. But they\'92re away off\
there in Passaic, and bother us as little as we bother them. The truth\
is, Edna, we\'92ve not acted right. We\'92ve been selfish--spending all our\
prosperity on ourselves. Of course, they\'92ve got everything they really\
want, but--well----\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s exactly it,\'94 said she eagerly. \'93My conscience has been hurting\
me. We ought to--to-- It wouldn\'92t cost much to make them perfectly\
comfortable--so they\'92d not have to work--and could get away from the\
grocery--and the--and the\'94--she hesitated before saying \'93father\'92s\
business,\'94 as if nerving herself to pronounce words of shame. And when\
she did finally force out the evading \'93father\'92s business,\'94 it was with\
such an accent that I couldn\'92t help laughing outright.\
\
\'93Undertaking\'92s a good-paying business,\'94 said I. \'93We certainly ought to\
be grateful to it. It supplied the eight thousand dollars that gave me\
the chance to buy half the rolling mill. And you know the rolling mill\
was the start of our fortune.\'94\
\
\'93Do you think father could be induced to retire?\'94 she asked.\
\
\'93Never,\'94 said I. \'93Your father\'92s a rich man, for Passaic. He\'92s got two\
hundred thousand at least hived away in tenements that pay from twenty\
to thirty-five per cent. And his business now brings in ten to fifteen\
thousand a year straight along.\'94\
\
\'93You can make _your_ father retire?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93Poor dad! I\'92ve been keeping him from being retired by the\
sheriff. He\'92s squeezing out a bare living. He\'92d be delighted to stop\
and have all his time for talking politics and religion.\'94\
\
\'93You could buy them a nice place a little way out in the country, on\
some quiet road. I\'92m sure your mother and your old maid sister would\
love it.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps,\'94 said I. \'93If it wasn\'92t _too_ quiet.\'94\
\
\'93But it must be quiet. And we\'92ll induce my father and mother to buy a\
place near by.\'94\
\
\'93Your father\'92ll not give up the business.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve thought it all out,\'94 said Edna, whose mind was equal to whatever\
task she gave it. \'93You must get some one to offer him a price he simply\
can\'92t refuse, and make a condition that he shall not go into business\
again. Aren\'92t those things done?\'94\
\
I was somewhat surprised, but not much, at the knowledge of business\
this displayed. \'93Why!--Why!\'94 laughed I. \'93And you pretend to know\
nothing about business!\'94\
\
She was in a sensible, loving mood that day. So she said with a quiet\
little laugh: \'93I make it a point to know anything that\'92s useful to me.\
I don\'92t know much about business. Why should I bother with it? I\'92ve got\
confidence in you.\'94\
\
It was not the first time I had got a peep into her mind and had\
seen how she looked on everyone, including me, as a wheel in her\
machine, and never interfered unless the wheel didn\'92t work to suit\
her. I laughed delightedly. There was something charmingly feminine,\
thought I, about this point of view so upside down. \'93Yes, I guess your\
father\'92ll jump for the bait you suggest,\'94 said I. \'93But why disturb him?\
He loves his undertaking.\'94\
\
She shivered.\
\
\'93And he\'92ll be miserable idling about.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I guess he\'92ll get along all right,\'94 said she, with sarcasm and\
with truth. \'93He\'92ll devote himself to suing his tenants and counting his\
money.... Godfrey, you simply must get those people in Passaic out of\
our way. I\'92ve been a little nervous over here, though I knew that none\
of these dreadful people we associate with has anything better in the\
way of family than us, and some have a lot worse. Oh, it\'92s _frightful_\
to have parents one\'92s ashamed of!\'94\
\
I think I blushed. I\'92m sure I looked away to avoid seeing her\
expression. \'93It\'92s frightful to be ashamed of one\'92s parents,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Now don\'92t be hypocritical,\'94 cried she. \'93You know perfectly well you\
are ashamed of your parents, as I am of mine.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll admit,\'94 said I, \'93that if they showed up at the office, I\'92d be\
a bit upset and would feel apologetic. But I\'92m ashamed of myself for\
feeling that way.\'94\
\
\'93If you only realized about things,\'94 said she, which was her phrase for\
hitting at me as lacking in refined instincts, \'93you\'92d not be ashamed of\
yourself, but would frankly suffer. They are a disgrace to us.\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re honest people, well meaning, and as good as the best in every\
essential way,\'94 said I. \'93Believe me, Edna, the fault isn\'92t in them.\
It\'92s in us. Suppose you found some day that Margot was ashamed of you\
and me.\'94\
\
\'93But she\'92ll not be,\'94 retorted Edna. \'93I for one will see to it that she\
has no cause to be anything but proud.\'94\
\
I couldn\'92t but admit that there were two sides to the problem of our\
parents. It was shameful to be ashamed of them. But it was also human.\
I couldn\'92t--and can\'92t--utterly damn in Edna a fault, a vulgar weakness,\
I myself had, and almost everyone I knew. No doubt, gentle reader,\
you are scandalized and disgusted. But one of my objects in relating\
this whole story is to scandalize and to disgust you. You have had too\
much consideration at the hands of writers--you and your hypocritical\
virtues and your hysterical nerves. If you are an American, you are\
probably far in advance of your parents in worldly knowledge, in\
education, in every way except perhaps manly and womanly self-respect.\
For along with your progress has come an infection of snobbishness and\
toadyism that seems in some mysterious way inseparable from higher\
civilization. So be shocked and disgusted with Edna and me, and don\'92t\
turn your hypocritical eyes inward on your own secret thoughts and\
actions about your own humble parents. Above all, don\'92t learn from\
this horrifying episode a decenter mode of thinking and feeling--_and_\
acting.\
\
\'93We must get them out of the way before we move to New York,\'94 said\
Edna. \'93Ever since Margot began at Mrs. Ryper\'92s I\'92ve been on pins and\
needles. You don\'92t know how malicious fashionable people are. Why, some\
of them who have nothing to do might at any time run out to Passaic and\
see for themselves.\'94\
\
Edna was sitting up in my lap, gazing at me with wide harassed-looking\
eyes. I burst out laughing. \'93They might take a camera along, and get\
some snapshots,\'94 I suggested.\
\
Edna\'92s face contracted with horror and her form grew limp and weak.\
\'93My God!\'94 she cried. \'93So they might. Godfrey, we must attend to it at\
once.\'94\
\
\
\
\
III\
\
\
I have never been able to come to a satisfactory verdict as to the\
intelligence of the human race. Is it stupid, or is it, rather,\
sluggish? Is it unable to think, or does it refuse to think? Does it\
believe the follies it pretends to believe and usually acts upon, or is\
it the victim of its own willful prejudices and hypocrisies? Never have\
I decided that a certain man or woman was practically witless, but that\
he or she has confounded me by saying or doing something indicating\
shrewdness or even wisdom.\
\
The women are especially difficult to judge. Take Edna, for example.\
\
It was impossible to interest her in anything worth while. But as to\
the things in which she was interested, none could have thought more\
clearly or keenly, or could have acted with more vigor and effect. I\
have often made serious blunders--inexcusable blunders--in managing\
my own affairs. To go no further, my management of my family would\
have convicted me of imbecility before any court not made up of\
good-natured, indifferent, woman-worshiping, woman-despising American\
husbands. Yes, I have made the stupidest blunders in all creation. But\
I cannot recall a single notable blunder made by Edna in the matters\
which alone she deemed worthy of her attention. She decided what she\
wanted. She moved upon it by the best route, whether devious or direct\
or a combination of the two. And she always got it.\
\
You may say her success was due to the fact that her objects were\
trivial. But if you will think a moment, you will appreciate that a\
thing\'92s triviality does not necessarily make it easy to attain. As much\
energy and skill may be shown in winning a sham battle as in winning a\
real. Still, I suppose minds are cast in molds of various sizes, and\
one cast in a small mold can deal only with the small. And I guess\
that, from whatever cause, the minds of women are of diverse kinds of\
smaller molds. Perhaps this is the result of bad education. Perhaps\
better education will correct it. I do not know. I can speak only of\
what is--of Edna as she is and always has been.\
\
Having made up her mind to fell the genealogical tree, that an\
artificial one might be stood up in its place, she lost no time in\
getting into action.\
\
It was on the Sunday following our talk--the earliest possible\
day--that she took me for the first visit we had made our parents\
in nearly three years. We had sent them presents. We had written\
them letters. We had received painfully composed and ungrammatical\
replies--these received both for Edna and myself at my office, because\
she feared the servants would pry into periodically arriving exhibits\
of illiteracy. We had written them of coming and bringing Margot with\
us. We had received suggestions of their coming to see us, which Edna\
had evaded by such excuses as that we were moving or that she or\
Margot was not well or that the cook had abruptly deserted. The world\
outside Passaic was a vague place to our old fathers and mothers. Their\
own immediate affairs kept them busy. So with no sense of deliberate\
alienation on their side and small and mildly intermittent sense of it\
on our side, the months and the years passed without our seeing one\
another.\
\
Edna announced to me the intended visit only an hour before we started.\
It was a habit of hers--a clever habit, too--never to take anyone into\
her confidence about her plans until the right moment--that is, the\
moment when execution was so near at hand that discussion would seem\
futile. At a quarter before nine on that Sunday morning she said:\
\
\'93Don\'92t dress for church. This is a good day to make that trip to\
Passaic.\'94\
\
\'93We\'92ll go by Miss Ryper\'92s for Margot,\'94 said I. \'93How the old people will\
stare when they see her!\'94\
\
Edna looked at me as if I had suddenly uncovered unmistakable evidence\
of my insanity. Then I who had clean forgot her foolish notions\
remembered. \'93But why not?\'94 I urged. \'93It will give them so much\
pleasure.\'94\
\
\'93Trash!\'94 ejaculated she. \'93They don\'92t care a rap about her. They can\'92t,\
as they\'92ve not seen her since she was a baby. And Margot would suffer\
horribly. I think it would be wicked to give a sweet, happy young girl\
a horrible shock.\'94\
\
This grotesque view of the effect of the sight of grandparents upon a\
grandchild struck me as amusing. But there was no echo of my laughter\
in the disgusted face of my wife. I sobered and said: \'93Yes, it would\
give her a shock. We\'92ve made a mistake, bringing her up in that way.\'94\
\
\'93Too late to discuss it now,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93I suppose so,\'94 I could not but agree. \'93I guess the mischief\'92s done\
beyond repair.\'94\
\
Said Edna: \'93Have you any sense of--of them being _your_ father and\
mother?\'94\
\
\'93Rather,\'94 said I. \'93My childhood is very vivid to me, and not at all\
disagreeable.\'94\
\
\'93It seems to me like a bad dream--unreal, and to be forgotten as\
quickly as I can.\'94\
\
She said this with a fine, spiritual look in her eyes, and I must say\
that Edna, refined, delicately beautiful, fashionably dressed, speaking\
her English with an elegant accent, did not suggest fusty-dusty,\
queer-looking Weeping Willie with his hearse and funeral coaches, his\
embalming apparatus and general appearance of animated casket, nor yet\
fat, sloppy Ma Wheatlands, always in faded wrappers and with holes cut\
in her shoes for her bunions.\
\
\'93Wear your oldest business suit,\'94 said Edna, coming back to earth from\
the contemplation of her own elevation and grandeur. \'93I shall dress as\
quietly as I dare. We mustn\'92t arouse the suspicions of the servants.\'94\
\
Edna\'92s fooleries amused me. I didn\'92t then appreciate the dangers of\
tolerating and laughing at the bad habits of a fascinating child.\
If I had, little good I\'92d have accomplished, I suspect. However, I\
got myself up as Edna directed, and when I saw how it irritated her\
I stopped making such remarks as: \'93Shall I wear a collar? Hadn\'92t I\
better sneak out the back way and join you at the ferry?\'94 I should\
have liked to get some fun out of our doings; that would have taken\
at least the saw edge off my feelings of self-contempt. I am not fond\
of hypocrisy, yet for that one occasion I should have welcomed the\
familiar human shamming and faking in such matters. But Edna would put\
the thing through like one of her father\'92s funerals. As we, in what\
was practically disguise, issued forth, she said loudly enough for the\
cocking ear of a maid who chanced to be in the front hall:\
\
\'93Anyhow, the country dust won\'92t spoil these clothes. I\'92m so glad it\'92s\
clear. How charming the woods will look.\'94\
\
Just enough to deceive. Edna expanded upon her cleverness in never\
saying too much, because saying too much always started people,\
especially servants, to thinking. But she abruptly checked her flow of\
self-praise as we seated ourselves in the ferry and she looked about.\
There, not a dozen seats away, loomed our cook! Yes, no mistake, it was\
our Mary, \'93gotten up regardless\'94 for a Sunday outing.\
\
\'93Do you see Mary?\'94 said my wife.\
\
\'93She\'92s the most conspicuous female in sight,\'94 said I. \'93She\'92s a credit\
to us.\'94\
\
\'93I must have been mad,\'94 groaned Edna, \'93to give her a holiday! Always\
the way. I never do a generous, kind-hearted thing that I don\'92t have to\
pay for it.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t follow you,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93She hates us,\'94 explained Edna. \'93Cooks--Irish cooks--invariably hate\
the families they draw wages from. She\'92s dogging us.\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense,\'94 said I. \'93She probably hasn\'92t even seen us.\'94\
\
But Edna was not listening; she was contriving. \'93We must let her leave\
the boat ahead of us. Pretend not to see her.\'94\
\
I obeyed orders. In the Jersey City train shed we, lagging behind, saw\
her take a train bound for a different destination from ours. Much\
relieved, Edna led the way to the Passaic train. Hardly were we seated\
when in at the door of the coach hurried our Mary, excited and blown.\
She came beaming down the aisle. Edna saluted her graciously and calmly.\
\
\'93I got in the wrong train,\'94 said Mary. \'93It\'92d never have took me\
nowheres near my cousin in Passaic.\'94\
\
Edna\'92s composure was admirable. Said I, when Mary had passed on, \'93Now\
what, my dear?\'94\
\
\'93You see she _is_ dogging us,\'94 replied Edna. \'93I\'92ve not a doubt she\
knows all about us.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t _think_ she\'92s got a camera,\'94 said I. \'93Still, they make them\
very small nowadays.\'94\
\
\'93We shall have to go on in the train, and return home from the station\
beyond,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93Do as you like,\'94 said I. \'93But as for me, I get off at Passaic and go\
to see the old folks.\'94\
\
\'93Please stop your joking,\'94 said Edna. \'93If you had any pride you\
couldn\'92t joke.\'94\
\
\'93I am serious,\'94 said I. \'93I shall go to see mother and father.\'94\
\
\'93No doubt her cousin lives in the same part of the slums,\'94 said Edna.\
\'93Oh, it is _hideous_!\'94\
\
I don\'92t know what possessed me--whether a fit of indigestion and\
obstinacy or a sudden access of sense of decency as I approached my old\
home. Whatever it was, it moved me to say: \'93My dear, this nonsense has\
gone far enough. We will do what we set out to do.\'94\
\
\'93Not I,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93Then I\'92ll drop off at Passaic alone, and hire a trap, and give Mary\
a seat in it as far as her cousin\'92s. I\'92m not proud of my parents, the\
more shame to me. But there\'92s a limit to my ability to degrade myself.\'94\
\
Edna and I had not lived together all those years without her learning\
the tone I use when I will not be trifled with. She did not argue. She\
sat silent and pale beside me. When the train stopped at Passaic she\
followed me from the car. Mary descended ahead of us and moved off at\
as brisk a pace as tight corsets and stiff new shoes would permit, in a\
direction exactly opposite that we were to take.\
\
\'93Aren\'92t you glad we didn\'92t go on?\'94 said I, eager to make it up.\
\
She made no reply. She maintained haughty and injured silence until we\
were within sight of the houses. Then she said curtly:\
\
\'93I\'92ll do the talking about our plans for them.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92ll be best,\'94 said I, most conciliatory.\
\
I had not intended to say this. There had been a half-formed resolution\
in my mind to oppose those plans. But her anger roused in me such a\
desire to pacify her that I promptly yielded, where, I must in honesty\
confess, I was little short of indifferent. American husbands have the\
reputation of being the most docile and the worst henpecked men in\
the world. All foreigners say so, and our women believe it. In fact,\
nothing could be further from the truth. The docility of American\
husbands is the good nature of indifference. A friend of mine has the\
habit of saying that his most valued and most valuable possession is\
his long list of things he cares not a rap about. It is a typically\
American and luminous remark. The men of other nations agitate over\
trifles, love to have the sense of being master at home--usually their\
one and only chance for a free swing at the joyous feeling of being\
boss. The American man, absorbed in his important work at office or\
factory, and not caring especially about anything else, lets thieving\
politicians rule in public affairs, lets foolish, incompetent women\
rule in domestic affairs. He has a half-conscious philosophy that he\
is shrewd enough, if he attends to his business, to make money faster\
than they can take it away from him, and that, if he does not attend to\
his business only, he will have nothing either for thieving politician\
and spendthrift wife or for himself. If you wish to discover how little\
there is in the notion of his docility, meddle with something he really\
cares about. Many a political rascal, many a shiftless wife, has done\
it and has gotten a highly disagreeable surprise.\
\
Perhaps what I saw had as much to do with my tame acquiescence in my\
wife\'92s projects as my desire to have peace between her and me, when\
peace meant yielding what only a vague and feeble filial impulse moved\
me to contest. I had what I thought was a clear and vivid memory of my\
natal place and Edna\'92s--how the two houses looked, how small and shabby\
they were, how mean their surroundings, how plain their interiors. But\
as we drove up I discovered that memory had been pleasantly deceiving\
me. Could these squalid hovels, these tiny, hideous boxes set in two\
dismal weedy oblongs of unkempt yards--could these be our old homes?\
And the bent old laboring man and his wife--we had drawn up in front of\
my home--could they be _my_ father and _my_ mother?\
\
A feeling of sickness, of nausea came over me. Not from repulsion for\
my parents--thank God, I had not sunk that low. But from abhorrence\
of myself, so degraded by the \'93higher world\'94 into which prosperity\
and Edna\'92s ambitions had dragged me that I could look down upon the\
gentle old man and the patient, loving old woman to whom I owed life\
and a fair start in the world. My blood burned and my eyes sank as they\
greeted me, their homely old hands trembling, their mouths distorted\
by emotion and age and missing teeth. I turned away while they were\
kissing Edna, for I felt I should hate her and loathe myself if I saw\
the expression that must be in her face.\
\
\'93There are my father and mother!\'94 she cried in a suffocating voice. And\
we three Lorings were watching her hurry across the yard and through\
the gap in the fence between the two places. My sister came forward.\
We kissed each other as awkwardly as two strangers. I looked at her\
dazedly. Mary, our cook, was an imposing looking lady beside this\
thin-haired, coarse-featured old maid. In embarrassed silence we four\
entered the house. I am not tall nor in the least fat, yet I had an\
uncontrollable impulse to stoop and to squeeze as I entered the squat\
and narrow doorway. That miserable little \'93parlor!\'94\
\
As we sat silent my roving glance at last sought my mother\'92s face. Oh,\
the faces, the masks, with which freakish and so often savagely ironic\
fate covers and hides our souls, making fair seem foul and foul seem\
fair, making beauty repellent and ugliness seem beautiful. Suddenly\
through that plain, time- and toil-scarred mask, through those dim,\
sunken eyes, I saw her soul--her mother\'92s heart--looking at me. And the\
tears poured into my eyes. \'93Mother!\'94 I sobbed in a choking voice, and\
I put my arms round her and nestled against her heart, a boy again--a\
bad boy with a streak of good in him. I felt how proud she--they\
all--were of me, the son and brother, who had gone forth and fulfilled\
the universal American dream of getting up in the world. I hoped, I\
prayed that they would not realize what a poor creature I was, with my\
snobbish shame.\
\
There was an awkward, rambling attempt at talk. But we had nothing\
to talk about--nothing in common. I happened to think of our not\
having brought Margot; how shameful it was, yet how glad I felt, and\
how self-contemptuous for being glad. To break that awful silence I\
enlarged upon Margot--her beauty, her cleverness.\
\
\'93She must be like Polly\'94--my sister\'92s name was Polly--\'93like Polly was\
at her age,\'94 observed my mother.\
\
I looked at Polly Ann, in whose faded face and withered form--faded and\
withered though she was not yet forty, was in fact but seven or eight\
years older than I. Like Polly! I could speak no more of Margot, the\
delicate loveliness of a rare, carefully reared hot-house exotic. Yes,\
exotic; for the girls and the women brought up in the super-refinements\
of prosperous class silliness seem foreign to this world--and are.\
\
A few minutes that seemed hours, and Edna came in, her father and\
mother limping and hobbling in her train. Edna was sickly pale and her\
eyelids refused to rise. I shook hands with old Willie Wheatlands,\
hesitated, then kissed the fat, sallow, swinging cheek of my\
mother-in-law. Said Edna in a hard, forced voice:\
\
\'93I\'92ve explained that Margot isn\'92t well and that we\'92ve got to get\
back----\'94\
\
\'93Mercy me!\'94 cried my mother. \'93Ain\'92t you going to stay to supper?\'94\
\
Supper! It was only half-past twelve. Supper could not be until five or\
half-past. We had been there half an hour and already conversation was\
exhausted and time had become motionless.\
\
\'93We intended to,\'94 said Edna. \'93But Margot wasn\'92t at all well when we\
left. We simply can\'92t stay away long. We\'92d not have come, but we felt\
we\'92d never get here if we kept on letting things interfere.\'94\
\
\'93You didn\'92t leave Margy _alone_?\'94 demanded Edna\'92s mother.\
\
\'93Almost,\'94 said Edna. \'93Only a--a servant.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you keep a nurse girl, too,\'94 said Polly. \'93I thought Edna didn\'92t\
look as if she did any of her own work.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I have a--a girl, in addition to the cook,\'94 replied Edna,\
flushing as she thus denied three of her five servants--flushing not\
because of the denial, but because in her confession she had almost\
forgotten about the numerous excuses based on the cook. \'93Godfrey has\
been doing very well, and we felt we could afford it.\'94\
\
\'93Better get rid of her,\'94 advised old Willie sourly. \'93And of the cook,\
too. Servant girls is mighty wasteful.\'94\
\
\'93And she\'92ll teach Margy badness,\'94 said my mother. \'93Them servants is\
full of poison. Even if yer pa\'92d had money I\'92d never have allowed no\
servant round my children, no more\'92n a snake in the cradle. I hope\
she\'92s a good Christian, and not a Catholic?\'94\
\
\'93She\'92s all right,\'94 declared Edna nervously. \'93But we\'92ll have to be going\
soon.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; that there girl might git drunk,\'94 said Mrs. Wheatlands.\
\
\'93And set fire to the house maybe,\'94 said my mother. \'93I heard of a case\
just last week.\'94\
\
\'93I wish you hadn\'92t said that,\'94 cried Edna, her tones of protest more\
like jubilation. \'93I\'92ll be wretched until I\'92m home again.\'94\
\
Mother told in detail and with rising excitement the story of the\
drunken nurse girl who had burned up herself and her charges, a pair\
of lovely twins. From that moment our families were anxious for us to\
go. The three women could see the girl drunk and the house burning.\
The two grandfathers, while less imaginative, were almost as uneasy.\
Besides, no doubt our families found us full as tiring as we found them.\
\
\'93But before we go,\'94 said Edna, in a business-like tone, \'93there\'92s one\
thing we wanted to talk about. Godfrey has had--that is, he has done\
very well in business. And of course our first thought--one of our\
first thoughts--was what could we do for you all down here. We hate to\
think of your living in this unhealthful part of the town. We want to\
see you settled in some healthful place, up in the hills.\'94\
\
We were watching the faces of our five kinsfolk. We could make nothing\
of their expression. It was heavy, dull--mere listening, without a hint\
of even comprehension behind.\
\
\'93We thought you, father, and Mr.--father Loring--might look round and\
find a nice farm with a big comfortable house--plenty big enough for\
you all--and Godfrey will buy it, and will pay for a man and a woman to\
look after you. He has done well, as I said, and he can afford it. In\
fact, they\'92ve made him president of the railroad.\'94\
\
My father, my mother, and my sister exchanged glances. A long, awed\
silence. Old Willie spoke in his squeaky, stingy voice: \'93I can\'92t leave\
my business. I ain\'92t footless like Loring there. _My_ business pays.\'94\
\
\'93You can sell it,\'94 said Edna. \'93You know you ought to retire. You were\
telling me how bad your health had been.\'94\
\
\'93Nobody else couldn\'92t make nothing like what I make out of it. The men\
growing up nowadays ain\'92t no account. The no-account women with heads\
full of foolishness leads \'92em off.\'94\
\
Edna agreed with him, pointed out that he\'92d have to give up soon\
anyhow, appealed to his cupidity for real estate by expanding upon the\
size and value of the farm I was willing to give him. She made a strong\
impression. The women were converted by the prospect of having help\
with the work. My father had long dreamed of a home in the country. He\
had not the imagination to picture how he would be bored, away from the\
loafers with whom he talked politics and religion. \'93And,\'94 said Edna,\
\'93you\'92ll have horses and things to ride in, so you can go where you\
please whenever you please.\'94\
\
We had roused them. We had dazzled them. It was plain that if a\
purchaser could be found for the Wheatlands undertaking business, Edna\
would carry her point. \'93Godfrey will look for somebody to take the\
business,\'94 said she to her father. \'93I want you and Father Loring to\
start out to-morrow morning, and not stop till you\'92ve found a farm.\'94\
\
I understood an uncertain gleam in old Willie\'92s eyes. \'93About the\
price,\'94 said I, speaking for the first time, \'93I\'92m willing to pay\
twenty-five thousand down for the place alone, and as I\'92ll pay cash,\
you ought to be able on mortgage to get a farm--or two or three\
adjoining farms--that would cost twice that.\'94\
\
The two families were dumbfounded.\
\
\'93I know I can trust you, Mr. Wheatlands, to get the money\'92s worth.\'94\
\
\'93Buy a big place,\'94 said Edna, of the unexpected timely shrewdnesses.\
\'93Go back from the main roads where land\'92s so dear.\'94\
\
Wheatlands nodded. \'93That\'92s a good idea,\'94 said he. \'93There\'92ll be plenty\
of roads after a while.\'94\
\
Edna was ready to depart. \'93Then it\'92s settled?\'94 said she.\
\
Her father nodded. \'93I\'92m willing to see what can be done. But I\'92d rather\
not have Ben Loring along. He\'92d interfere with a good bargain.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, you go alone, Willie,\'94 said my father. \'93Anyhow, I\'92ve got to \'92tend\
store. I can\'92t afford a boy any more.\'94\
\
The mention of the, to them, enormous sum of money had put them in a\
state of awe as to Edna and me. It saddened me to observe how quickly\
the weed of snobbishness, whose seeds are in all human nature, sprang\
up and dominated the whole garden. They lost the sense of our blood\
kinship with them. They felt that we, able to dispense such splendid\
largess, were of a superior order of being. And I saw that my and\
Edna\'92s feeling of strangeness toward them was intimacy beside the\
feeling of strangeness toward us which they now had. In my dealings\
with my fellow beings I have often noted this sort of thing--that the\
snobbishness of those who look down is a weak and hesitating impulse\
which would soon die out but for the encouragement it gets from the\
snobbishness of those who look up. I read somewhere, \'93Caste is made by\
those who look up, not by those who look down.\'94 That is a great truth,\
and like most great, simple, obvious truths is usually overlooked.\
\
Looking back I see that my own first decisive impulse toward the caste\
feeling came that day, came when my people and Edna\'92s, discovering that\
we were rich, began to treat us as lower class treats upper class.\
\
My mother had been scrutinizing me for signs of the majesty of wealth.\
\'93Why don\'92t you wear a beard, or leastways a mustache, Godfrey?\'94 she\
finally inquired. \'93Then you wouldn\'92t seem so boyish like.\'94\
\
\'93I used to wear a mustache,\'94 said I, \'93but I cut it off because--I don\'92t\
recall why.\'94\
\
In fact I did recall. I noted one day that I had a good mouth and\
better teeth than most men have. And it came to me how absurd it was\
to hang a bunch of hair from my upper lip to trail in the soup and to\
embalm the odors of past cigars for the discomfort of my nose. Edna\
kept after me for a time to let it grow again. But reading in some\
novel she regarded as authoritative that mustaches were \'93common,\'94 she\
desisted. And I found my boyish appearance highly useful. It led men to\
underestimate me--a signal advantage in the contests of wit against wit\
in which I daily engaged with a view to wrenching a fortune for myself\
away from my fellow men.\
\
My mother went on to urge me to make my face look older and more\
formidable. Now that she had learned what a grand person I was she\
feared others would not realize it. Edna, who, as I have said,\
was shrewdness personified where her own interests were involved,\
immediately saw the dangerous bearings of this newly aroused vanity\
of our kin. \'93I forgot to caution you,\'94 said she, \'93not to mention our\
prosperity. If we were talked about now, it might be lost entirely.\
The only reason Godfrey and I came to you so soon with the news of it\
was because we wanted to do something for you right away. And we knew\
we could trust you not to get us into trouble. Don\'92t talk about us. If\
you hear people talking, if they ask you questions, pretend you don\'92t\
understand and don\'92t know. You see, it may be spies from our enemies.\'94\
\
One glance round that circle of eager faces was enough to convince that\
Edna had made precisely the impression she desired. I could see that my\
mother and old Weeping Willie, the shrewd of the five--the two to whom\
Edna and I owed most by inheritance--were prepared to deny knowing us\
if that would aid in safeguarding the precious prosperity. My father\
and sister were obviously disappointed that they could not go about\
boasting of our magnificence and getting from the neighbors the envy\
and respect due the near relations of a plutocrat. But there was no\
danger of their being indiscreet; Edna could breathe freely. And when\
the two families were tucked away in the midst of a large and secluded\
farm, she could tell what genealogical stories she pleased without fear\
of being confounded by the truth.\
\
By three o\'92clock we were back in Brooklyn. Edna felt and looked\
triumphant. The crowning of the day\'92s work had been small but\
significant. A heavy rain storm that came up while we were on the way\
back must have made the servants think we had cut short our woodland\
outing. As we were going to bed that might Edna roused herself from\
deep study and broke a long silence with, \'93I hesitated whether to tell\
them you had become president of the road.\'94\
\
I had noted that seeming slip of hers, so unlike her cautious reticence.\
\
\'93Then I remembered they\'92d be sure to see it in the papers,\'94 continued\
she. \'93And I decided it was best to tell and quiet them.\'94\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
While the old folks were industriously settling themselves in the\
New Jersey woods-- Here let me relieve my mind by saying a few words\
in mitigation of the unfilial and snobbish conduct of Edna and me. I\
admit we deserve nothing but condemnation. I admit I am more to blame\
than she because I could have compelled her to act better toward our\
families, though of course I could not have changed her feelings--or my\
own, for that matter. But, as often happens in this world, the thing\
that was in motive shameful turned out well. We and our families had\
grown hopelessly apart. Intercourse with them could not but have been\
embarrassing and uncomfortable for both sides. When we got them the\
farm, got them away from the malarial and squalid part of Passaic into\
a healthful region where they lived in much better health and in a\
comfort they could appreciate, we did the best possible thing for them,\
as well as for ourselves. Do not think for a moment that because I am\
ashamed of my snobbish motives I am therefore advocating the keeping\
up of irksome and absurd ties merely out of wormy sentimentality. It\
has always seemed to me, when we have but the one chance at life, the\
one chance to make the best of our talents and opportunities, that\
only moral or mental weakness, or both, would waste the one chance in\
the bondage of outworn ties. When one has outgrown any association,\
lop it off relentlessly, say I. If the living lets the dying cling to\
it, the dying does not live but the living dies. If you are associated\
with anyone in any way--business, social, ties of affection, whatever\
you please--and if you do not wish to lose that one, then keep yourself\
alive and abreast of him or her. And if you let yourself begin to decay\
and find yourself cut away, whose is the fault, if fault there be?\
We--Edna and I--perhaps did not do all we might to make our outgrown\
families happy; I say perhaps, though I am by no means sure that we did\
not do all that was in our power, for they certainly would have got no\
pleasure out of seeing more of two people so uncongenial to them in\
every respect. At any rate, we did not leave our families to starve or\
to suffer. Hard though my charming, lovely wife was, I cannot conceive\
her sinking to that depth. On the whole, I feel that we could honestly\
say we took the right course with them. That is, we helped them without\
hindering ourselves. We did the right thing, though not in the right\
way.\
\
While our families were choosing a farm, were fixing up the buildings\
to suit their needs and tastes, were moving themselves from their\
ancient haunts, Edna was as industriously busy making far deeper\
inroads on the new prosperity. She was planning the conquest of New\
York.\
\
Every day in the year many a suddenly enriched family is busy about\
the same enterprise. Families from the less fashionable parts of the\
city moving to the fashionable parts. Families from other cities and\
towns--east, west, north, and south--advancing to social conquest under\
the leadership of mammas and daughters tired of shining in obscure,\
monotonous, and unappreciative places. There are I forget how many\
thousands of millionaires on Manhattan Island; enough, I know, with the\
near millionaires and those living like millionaires, to make a city of\
three or four hundred thousand, not including servants and parasites.\
Not all of these have the fashionable craze; at least, they haven\'92t\
it in its worst form--the form in which it possessed my wife. All the\
acute sufferers must find suitable lodgments near Fifth Avenue if not\
in it.\
\
Now New York is ever ready to receive and to \'93trim\'94 the arriving\
millionaire. It has all kinds of houses and apartments to meet the\
peculiarities of his--or, rather, of his wife\'92s and daughter\'92s--notions\
of grandeur. It has a multitude of purveyors of furnishings and\
decorations likewise designed to catch crude and grandiose tastes. My\
wife was busy with these gentry.\
\
\'93Don\'92t you think we\'92d better go a little slow?\'94 said I. \'93Why not live\
in a hotel on Manhattan and look about us?\'94\
\
I had respect for my wife\'92s capacity at the woman side of the game;\
she had thoroughly drilled me to more than generous appreciation of\
it. But at the same time I was not so blinded by her charm for me or\
so convinced by her insistent and plausible egotism that I had not\
noted certain minor failures of hers due to her ignorance of the art\
of spending money. She was clever at learning. But often her vanity\
lured her into fancying she knew, when in fact her education in that\
particular direction was all miseducation. She dressed much more\
giddily in our first years in Brooklyn than she did afterwards. And in\
the later years she made still further discoveries as to dress that\
resulted in another revolution, away from quietness, not toward the\
gaudy but toward smartness--that curious quality which makes a woman\'92s\
toilet conspicuous without the least suggestion of the loud.\
\
However, Edna scorned my suggestion that she make haste slowly. She\
had long been engaged in a thorough study of the mode of life in\
millionairedom. Newspapers, Sunday supplements, magazines, and society\
novels had helped her. She had examined the exteriors of the famous\
palaces. She had got into the drawing-rooms and ballrooms of two or\
three palaces by way of high-priced charity tickets. She had in one\
instance roamed into sitting rooms, bedrooms, bathrooms until caught\
and led back by some vigilant and unbribable servant. I wonder if she\
ever recalls that adventure now! Probably not. I think I have recorded\
her ability absolutely to forget whatever it pleases her not to\
remember. She had been educating herself, so when I suggested caution,\
she replied:\
\
\'93Don\'92t you fret, Godfrey. I know what I\'92m about. I\'92ll get what we\'92ve\
got to have.\'94\
\
And I\'92ll concede that she did--also, that I thought it overwhelmingly\
grand at the time. It was a house in a fashionable side street,\
between Madison avenue and Fifth--a magnificent house built for exactly\
such a family as mine. That is, it was built entirely for show and not\
at all for comfort; it fairly bristled with the luxuries and \'93modern\
conveniences,\'94 but most of them were of the sort that looks comfortable\
but is not. The rent was some preposterous sum--thirty-five or forty\
thousand a year. We had room enough for the housing of nearly a hundred\
people, counting servants as people, which I believe is not the custom.\
It was fitted throughout in the fashion which those clever leeches who\
think out and sell luxuries have in all ages imposed upon the rich man\
because it means money in their pockets. Once in a while you find a\
rich man who has the courage to live as he pleases, but most of them\
live as the fashion commands. And many of them have no idea that there\
is any less comfortless and less foolish way to live. You imagine,\
gentle reader, that people with money live in beauty and comfort. You\
imagine that you could do it also if you had but the wealth. Believe\
me, you deceive yourself. Beyond question a certain amount of money is\
necessary to the getting of attractive and comfortable surroundings.\
But there is another, an equally indispensable and a far rarer factor.\
That factor, gentle reader, is intelligence--knowledge of the resources\
of civilization, knowledge of the realities as to comfort, luxury, and\
taste.\
\
I am tempted to linger upon the details of the extravagance of that\
first big establishment of Edna\'92s. It was so astounding and so\
ridiculous. I saw that she had delivered us and our fortune over\
to hordes of crafty, thirsty bloodsuckers--merchants, tradesmen,\
servants. But her heart was set upon it, and all other rich people were\
living in that same way. \'93You want to do the right thing by Margot,\
don\'92t you?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93By you and Margot,\'94 said I. \'93Go ahead. I guess I can find the money.\'94\
\
I shan\'92t here go into the ways I discovered or invented for finding\
that money. They were not too scrupulous, but neither were they\
commercially dishonorable. I must smile there. Being of an inquiring\
and jocose mind I have often tried to find an action that, in the\
opinion of the most eminent commercial authorities, was absolutely\
dishonorable. Never yet have I found a single action, however wrong\
and even criminal in general, that they would not declare in certain\
circumstances perfectly honorable. And those \'93certain circumstances\'94\
could always be boiled down to the one circumstance--needing the money.\
\
I can\'92t recall exactly how many servants we had to wait on us two, but\
it was about thirty-five. I remember hearing my wife say one month that\
our meat bill alone was about a thousand dollars. For a time I fancied\
we were living more grandly than anyone else in town. But it soon\
revealed itself to me that, as things went with \'93our class,\'94 we were\
leading rather a simple life. Certainly nothing we did marked us out\
from the others in that region. The sum totals suggested that servants\
stood at the front windows all day long tossing money into the street.\
But nothing of the kind occurred. You would have said we ate the finest\
food in wholesale quantities. Yet never did I get a notably good meal\
at my own house. The coffee was always poor. The fruit was below the\
average of sidewalk stands. We often had cold-storage fowls and fish\
on the table. We paid for the best; I\'92m sure we paid for it many times\
over. We got--what one always gets when the wife is too intellectual\
and too busy to attend to her business. But I assure you it was grandly\
served. The linen and the dishes were royal, the servants were in\
liveries of impressive color and form--though I could have wished that\
my wife had been as sensitive to odors as I was, and had compelled\
some of those magnificent gentry to do a little bathing. Throughout\
the establishment the same superb scale was maintained. We lived like\
the rest of the millionaires, neither better nor worse. We lived in\
grandeur and discomfort. But my wife was ecstatic, and I was therefore\
content. Yes, we were very grand. And, as in Brooklyn, the glasses\
came to the table with a certain sour odor not alluring as you lifted\
them to drink--the odor that causes an observant man or woman to say,\
\'93Aha--dirty rags in this perfect lady\'92s kitchen--dirty rags and all\
that goes with them.\'94 But only a snarling cynic would complain of these\
vulgar trifles. There\'92s always at least a fly leg in the ointment.\
\
\'93Didn\'92t I tell you I knew what I was about?\'94 said Edna triumphantly.\
\
\'93You did,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Haven\'92t we got what we wanted?\'94\
\
\'93We have,\'94 said I, perhaps somewhat abruptly, for I was just then\
wondering how the devil we were going to keep it.\
\
\'93And if it hadn\'92t been for me,\'94 proceeded she \'93we\'92d still be living in\
_Brooklyn_!\'94\
\
\'93Or in Passaic,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Don\'92t _speak_ of Passaic,\'94 she cried. \'93I\'92m trying to forget it.\'94\
\
\'93We were very happy then,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93_I_ was miserable,\'94 retorted she.\
\
\'93I could find it in my heart to wish we weren\'92t _always_ attended by\
servants,\'94 said I. \'93I almost never see you alone.\'94\
\
\'93What a bourgeois you are,\'94 laughed she. Then--after a thorough glance\
round to make sure housekeeper or maid or lackey wasn\'92t on watch--she\
patted my cheek and kissed me, and added: \'93But you do make me happy.\
I\'92m _so_ proud of you! No matter what I want I\'92m never afraid to buy\
it, for I know you can get all the money you want to.\'94\
\
I winced. Said I: \'93I\'92m afraid you\'92d not be proud of some of the ways I\
get the money.\'94\
\
She frowned. \'93Don\'92t talk business, please,\'94 she said. \'93You know we\
never have in all our married life. You\'92ve always respected my position\
as your wife. All business is low--is mere sordidness.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it\'92s all low,\'94 said I. \'93Sometimes I think all living is low as\
well. Edna\'94--I put my arm round her--\'93don\'92t you ever feel that we\'92d be\
_really_ happy, that we\'92d get something genuine out of life--if you and\
Margot and I----\'94\
\
She stopped my mouth with a kiss. \'93You never will grow up to your\
station, darling.\'94\
\
I said no more. Indeed, it was on hastiest impulse that I had said so\
much, an impulse sprung from a mood of depression.\
\
The cause of that mood was a nasty reverse in Wall Street. It had\
rudely halted me in my triumphant way toward the security of the man of\
many millions. It had set me to wavering uncertainly, with the chances\
about even for resuming the march and for tumbling into the abyss of a\
discreditable bankruptcy.\
\
There are in New York two well-defined classes of the rich--the\
permanently rich and the precariously rich. The permanently rich are\
those who by the vastness of their wealth or by the strength of their\
business and social connections cannot possibly be dislodged from the\
plutocracy. The precariously rich are those who have much money and are\
making more, but are not strong enough to survive a series of typhoons,\
and are without the support of indissoluble business and social\
connections. My friend G----, for example, head of the famous banking\
house, associated in business and by marriage with half the permanent\
plutocracy, was practically bankrupt in the late panic. Had he been a\
man of ordinary position he would have gone into bankruptcy, and, I\
more than suspect, into jail. But his fellow plutocrats dared not let\
him drop, much as they would have liked to see his arrogance brought\
low, much as they longed to divide among themselves his holdings of\
gilt-edged securities; if he had gone down it would have made the whole\
financial world tremble. He was saved. On the other hand, my friend\
J----, richer actually, was ruined, was plucked by his associates, was\
finally jailed for doing precisely the things every man of finance did\
over and over again in that same period of stress--for, what invariably\
happens to moral codes in periods of stress?\
\
I was at that time--but not now, gentle reader, so cheer up and read\
on--I was at that time in the class not of the permanently but of the\
precariously rich. And through a miscalculation I had laid myself open\
to the dangers that lie in wait for the man short of ready cash. The\
miscalculation was as to the extravagance of my wife\'92s undertakings.\
She, against my express request, had contracted without consulting or\
telling me several enormous bills. It is idle to say she ought not have\
done this. I knew her well; I should have been on guard. I had begun\
my married life wrong, as the young man very much in love is apt to\
do; so, to hold her love and liking, I had to keep on giving her taste\
for spending money free rein. If I had not, she would have thought me\
small and mean, would have made life at home exceedingly uncomfortable\
for me, for I am not of those men who can take from a woman what they\
wish whether she wishes to give or not. So the whole fault was mine.\
When the storm broke, in the light of its first terrific flash that\
illuminated for me every part of my affairs, I discovered that I was\
not prepared as I had been imagining. The big bills of my wife were\
presented, for the merchants knew I was heavily interested in the\
stocks that were tobogganing. Those bills had to be paid, and paid\
at once, or it would run like wildfire uptown and down that I was in\
difficulties; and when a man is known to be in financial difficulties,\
how the birds and beasts of prey from eagles and lions to buzzards and\
jackals do come flapping and loping!\
\
There followed several anxious days and nights. On one of those\
nights I rose from beside my wife--we still slept together--and went\
into the adjoining room. I turned on an electric light and began for\
the thousandth time, I dare say, to look at the critical papers and\
to grope for the desperate \'93way out.\'94 I was startled by my wife\'92s\
voice--sleepy, peevish:\
\
\'93Do turn out that light and come to bed, Godfrey. You know how it\
disturbs me for you to get up in the night. And I\'92ve such a hard day\
before me to-morrow with the upholsterers and curtain people.\'94\
\
I obediently turned off the light. As I was about to throw myself into\
bed and draw the covers over me, a broad beam from the moon flooded\
the face of a portrait on the opposite wall--the face of my daughter\
Margot. I sat on the edge of the bed and looked at that face--pure,\
sweet, with the same elevated expression her mother had in these days\
of refinement and climbing. Said I to Edna:\
\
\'93Are you asleep, dear?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 she answered crossly. \'93I\'92m waiting for you to quiet down.\'94\
\
\'93Then--let me talk to you a few minutes.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, please!\'94 she cried, flinging herself to the far edge of the bed.\
\'93You have no consideration for me--none at all.\'94\
\
\'93Listen,\'94 I said. \'93I\'92m face to face with ruin.\'94\
\
She did not move or speak, but I could feel her intense attention.\
\
\'93If I let matters take their course I can save my reputation and my\
official position. But for many years we\'92ll have to live quietly--about\
as we did in Brooklyn.\'94\
\
\'93I _can\'92t_ do that,\'94 cried she. \'93The fall would kill me. You know\
how proud I am.... Just as I had everything ready for us to get into\
society! Godfrey, how could you! And I thought you were clever at\
business.\'94\
\
I could not see her, nor she me, except in dimmest outline. I said:\
\'93But we\'92d have each other and Margot. And my salary isn\'92t so small, as\
salaries go.\'94\
\
\'93Isn\'92t there _any_ way to avoid it?\'94 She was sitting up in bed, her\
nervous fingers upon my arm. \'93You must _think_, Godfrey. You mustn\'92t\
play Margot and me this horrible trick. You mustn\'92t give up so easily.\
You must think--think--_think_!\'94\
\
\'93I have,\'94 said I. \'93I\'92ve not slept for three days and nights. There\'92s no\
way--no honest way.\'94\
\
\'93Then there _is_ a way!\'94 she cried.\
\
\'93But not an honest one.\'94\
\
She laughed scornfully. \'93And you pretend to love me! When my life and\
Margot\'92s happiness are at stake you talk like a Sunday-school boy.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I. \'93And I\'92ve been thinking more or less that way lately for\
the first time in years. It wasn\'92t long after I started when I cut my\
business eye teeth. I found out that as the game lay I\'92d not get far\
if I stuck to the old maxims of the copy book and the Sunday school.\
Except by accident nobody ever got rich who followed them. To get\
rich you\'92ve got to make a lot of people work for you and work cheap,\
and you\'92ve got to sell what they make as dear as you can. Success in\
business means taking advantage of the ignorance or the necessities of\
your fellow men, or both.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t waste time talking that kind of nonsense,\'94 said she impatiently.\
\'93It doesn\'92t mean anything to me--or to anybody, I guess. The thing\
for you to do is to put your mind on the real thing--how to save your\
family and yourself.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s what I\'92m talking about,\'94 said I. \'93I\'92m talking about saving\
myself and my family. As I told you, my troubles--the first business\
troubles I\'92ve ever had--have set me to thinking. I\'92ve not been doing\
right all these years. It\'92s true, everybody does as I\'92ve been doing.\
It\'92s true I\'92ve been more generous and more considerate than most men\
with opportunities and the sense to see them. But I\'92ve been doing\
wrong.\'94\
\
I paused, hoping for some sign of sympathy. None came. I went on:\
\
\'93And I\'92ve been wondering these last few days if by doing it I haven\'92t\
been ruining myself and my family--not financially, but in more\
important ways. Edna, what\'92s the sense in this life we\'92re leading? What\
will be the end of it all? Is there any decency or happiness in it?\
Haven\'92t we been going backward instead of forward?\'94\
\
All the time I was talking I could feel she was not listening. When I\
finished she said: \'93Godfrey, what is this way you can escape by?\'94\
\
\'93I can sell out my partners in the deals that have gone bad.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps they\'92re selling _you_ out,\'94 she instantly suggested. \'93Why, of\
course they are doing that very thing!--while _you_ are driveling about\
honesty like a backwoods hypocrite of a church deacon.\'94\
\
\'93No, they\'92re not selling me out,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93How do you know?\'94 cried she.\
\
\'93I caught them at that trick in a former deal and in the early stages\
of this one. And I fixed things so that, while they have to trust me, I\
don\'92t trust them.\'94\
\
She laughed mockingly. \'93Godfrey, I think your mind must be going. You\
talking about sacrificing your fortune and your wife and your child\
for men who\'92ve tried to ruin you--men who are even now thinking out\
some scheme for doing it.... Suppose you saved yourself and let them\
go--what then? Wouldn\'92t you be rich? And when you were secure again\
couldn\'92t you pay them back what they lost if you were still foolish\
enough to think it necessary?\'94\
\
It was not the first time she had astonished me with the depth of her\
practical insight--and her skill at logic--when she cared to use her\
mind. \'93I had thought of saving myself and paying back afterwards,\'94 said\
I. \'93But I\'92m not sure I\'92d save myself. It\'92s simply my one chance.\'94\
\
\'93Then you\'92ve got to take that chance,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93I didn\'92t expect you to talk like this,\'94 said I. \'93The only reason I\
haven\'92t spoken of my troubles before was that I feared you\'92d forbid me\
to do what I was being tempted to do.\'94\
\
And that was the truth about my feeling. I had always heard--and\
had firmly believed--that woman was somehow the exemplar of ideal\
morality, that it was she who kept men from being worse than they were,\
that the evil being done by men pursuing success was done without the\
knowledge of their pure, idealist wives and mothers and daughters. I\
can\'92t account for my stupidity in this respect. Had I not on every side\
the spectacle that gave the lie to the shallow pretense of feminine\
moral superiority? Was it not the women, with their insatiable appetite\
for luxury and splurge; was it not the women, with their incessant\
demands for money and ever more money; was it not the women, with their\
profound immorality of any and every class that earns nothing and\
simply spends; was it not the women, the _ladies_, who were edging on\
the men to get money, no matter how? For whom were the grand houses,\
the expensive hotels, the exorbitant flimsy clothing, the costly\
jewelry, the equipages, the opera boxes, the senseless, spendthrift\
squandering upon the degrading vanities of social position?\
\
I laughed somewhat cynically. \'93No wonder you\'92ve always refused to learn\
anything about business,\'94 said I. \'93It\'92s a habit among big business men\
to refuse to know anything as to the details of a large transaction\
that can be carried through only by dirty work. If we don\'92t know, we\
can pretend that the dirty work isn\'92t being done by or for us--isn\'92t\
being done at all.\'94\
\
\'93Now you are getting coarse,\'94 said my wife. \'93Do you know what I think\
of you?\'94 I could not see her expression, but the voice always betrays\
if there is insincerity, because we do not deal enough with the\
blind to learn to deceive perfectly with the voice. Her tones were\
absolutely sincere as she answered her own question: \'93I think it is\
cowardly of you to come to me with your business troubles. If you were\
brave you\'92d simply have quietly done whatever was necessary to save\
your family. Yes, it is cowardly!\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t mean it as cowardice,\'94 said I, admiring but irritated by this\
characteristic adroitness. \'93In the stories and the plays that give such\
thrills, the husband, in the crisis and tempted to do wrong, appeals to\
his wife. And they are brought closer together, and she helps him to do\
right, and everything ends happily.\'94 Again I laughed good-humoredly.\
\'93It doesn\'92t seem to be turning out that way, does it, dear? My heavenly\
picture of you and Margot and me living modestly and making up in love\
what we lack in luxury--it doesn\'92t attract you?\'94\
\
She said in her patient, superior tone: \'93I suppose you never will\
understand me or my ideals. What you\'92ve been doing in annoying me\
with your business, it\'92s as if when I was giving a dinner I assembled\
my guests and compelled them to watch all the preparations for the\
dinner--the killing of the lambs and the fish and the birds, the\
cleaning, all those ugly and low things. Bringing business into the\
home and the social life, it\'92s like bringing the kitchen into the\
drawing-room.\'94\
\
The obvious answer to this shallow but plausible and attractive\
cleverness of hers did not come to me then. If it had I\'92d not have\
spoken it. For of what use to argue with the human animal, female\
or male, about its dearest selfishnesses and vanities? Of what use\
to point out to human self-complacence, greediness and hypocrisy\
that a \'93refined\'94 and \'93cultured\'94 existence of ease and luxury can be\
obtained only by the theft and murder of dishonest business--that for\
one man to be vastly rich thousands of men must somehow be robbed and\
oppressed, even though the rich man himself directly does no robbing\
and oppressing? If I have sucking pig for dinner, I kill sucking pig as\
surely as if my hand wielded the knife of the butcher. But the human\
race finds it convenient and comfortable not to think so. Therefore,\
let us not bother our heads about it.\
\
At that period of my career I had not thought things out so thoroughly\
as I have since--in these days when events have compelled me to open my\
eyes and to see. In my hypocrisy, in my eagerness to save myself, I was\
not loth to take refuge behind the advice given by my wife partly in\
genuine ignorance of business, partly in pretended ignorance of it.\
\
Said I: \'93I suppose you\'92re right. I ought to think only of my family.\
Heaven knows, my rascal friends aren\'92t thinking in my interest. If I\
don\'92t do it, no one will. There\'92s no disputing that--eh?\'94\
\
No reply. She was asleep--or, rather, was pretending to be asleep. The\
matter had been settled, why discuss it further? Why expose herself\
longer than unavoidable to the danger of being unable to be, or to\
pretend to be, ignorant of business, of the foundation upon which her\
splendid, cultured structure of ambition proudly reared?\
\
Often in her sleep her hand would seek mine, and when it was\
comfortably nestled she would give a little sigh of content that\
thrilled me through and through. Her hand now stole into mine and the\
sigh of content came softly from her lips. \'93My love,\'94 I murmured,\
kissing her cheek before I lay down. How could I for a minute have\
considered any course that would have made her unhappy, that might have\
lessened, perhaps destroyed, her love for me?\
\
\
\
\
IV\
\
\
It is hardly necessary to say that I threw overboard my partners and\
saved myself. Indeed, I emerged from the crisis--liberally bespattered\
with mud, it is true--but richer than when I entered it. Since I was\
doing the act that was the supreme proof of my possessing the courage\
and the skill for leadership in business--since I was definitely\
breaking with the old-fashioned morality--I felt it was the part of\
wisdom to do the thing so thoroughly, so profitably, that instead of\
being execrated I should be admired. There were attacks on me in the\
newspapers; there were painful interviews with my partners--not so\
painful to me as they would have been had I not been able to remind\
them of their own unsuccessful treacheries and to enforce the spoken\
reminder with the documentary proof. But on the whole I came off\
excellently well--as who does not that \'93gets away with the goods?\'94\
\
In these days of increased intelligence and consequent lessened\
hypocrisy, the big business man is the object of only perfunctory\
hypocrisies from outraged morality. It has been discovered that the\
farmer watering his milk or the grocer using solder-\'93mended\'94 scales\
is as bad as the man who \'93reorganizes\'94 a railway or manipulates a\
stock--is worse actually because the massed mischief of the million\
little business rascals is greater than the sensational misdeeds of\
the few great rascals. It has been discovered that human nature is\
good or bad only according to the opportunities and necessities, not\
according to abstract moral standards. And the cry is no longer, \'93Kill\
the scoundrel,\'94 but, \'93That fellow had the sense to outwit us. We must\
learn from him how to sharpen our wits so that we won\'92t let ourselves\
be robbed.\'94 A healthful sign this, that masses of men are ceasing from\
twaddle about vague ideals and are educating themselves in practical\
horse sense. It may be that some day the honest husbandman will learn\
to guard his granary not only against the robber with the sack in the\
dark of the morn, but also against the rats and mice who pilfer ten\
bushels to every one that is stolen. Of one thing I am certain--until\
men learn to take heed in the small, they will remain easy prey in the\
large.\
\
Far from doing me harm, my bold stroke was of the greatest\
benefit--from the standpoint of material success, and that is the\
only point of view I am here considering. It did me as much good with\
the world as it has done me with you, gentle reader. For while you\
are exclaiming against my wickedness you are in your secret heart\
confessing that if I had chosen the ideally honest course, had retired\
to obscurity and poverty, you would have approved--and would have lost\
interest in me. Why, if I had chosen that ideal course, I doubt not I\
should have lost my railway position. My directors would have waxed\
enthusiastic over my \'93old-fashioned honesty,\'94 and would have looked\
round for another and shrewder and stronger man to whom to intrust the\
management of their railway--which would not pay dividends were it run\
along the lines of old-fashioned honesty. The outburst of denunciation\
soon spent itself, like a summer storm beating the giant cliffs of a\
mountain. Of what use to rage futilely against my splendid immovable\
fortune? The attacks, the talk about my bold stroke, the exaggerations\
of the size of the fortune I had made, all served to attract attention\
to me, to make me a formidable and an interesting figure. I leaped from\
obscurity into fame and power--and I had the money to maintain the\
position I had won.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
Long before, indeed as soon as we moved to Manhattan, my wife had\
joined fashionable and exclusive Holy Cross Church and had plunged\
straightway into its charity work. A highly important part of her\
Brooklyn education had been got in St. Mary\'92s, in learning how to do\
charity work and how to make it count socially. Edna genuinely loved\
charity work. She loved to patronize, loved to receive those fawning\
blessings and handkissings which city poverty becomes adept at giving\
the rich it lives off of. The poor family understands perfectly that\
the rich visit and help not through mere empty sentimental nonsense of\
brotherhood, but to have their vanities tickled in exchange for the\
graciousness of their condescending presence and for the money they\
lay out. As the poor want the money and have no objection to paying\
for it with that cheap and plentiful commodity, cringing--scantily\
screening mockery and contempt--rich and poor meet most comfortably in\
our cities. Not New York alone, but any center of population, for human\
nature is the same, city and country, San Francisco, Bangor--Pekin or\
Paris, for that matter.\
\
There is a shallow fashion of describing this or that as peculiarly New\
York, usually snobbishness or domestic unhappiness or wealth worship,\
dishonest business men or worthless wives. It is time to have done\
with such nonsense. New York is in no way peculiar, nor is any other\
place, beyond trifling surface differences. New York is nothing but\
the epitome of the whole country, just as Chicago is. If you wish\
to understand America, study New York or Chicago, our two universal\
cities. There you find in one place and in admirable perspective a\
complete museum of specimens of what is scattered over three and a\
half million square miles. For, don\'92t forget, New York is not the few\
blocks of fashionable district alone. It is four million people of all\
conditions, tastes, and activities. And the dominant force of struggle\
for money and fashion is no more dominant in New York than it is in\
the rest of America. New York is more truly representative of America\
than is Chicago, for in Chicago the Eastern and Southern elements are\
lacking and the Western element is strong out of proportion.\
\
I was telling of my wife\'92s blossoming as Lady Bountiful in search\
not of a heavenly crown, but of what human Lady Bountiful always\
seeks--social position. Charity covers a multitude of sins; the\
greatest of them is hypocrisy. I have yet to see a charitable man\
or woman or child whose chief and only noteworthy object was not\
self-glorification. The people who believe in brotherhood do not go in\
for charity. They wish to abolish poverty, whereas charity revels in\
poverty and seeks to increase it, to change it from miserable poverty\
which might die into comfortable pauperism which can live on, and\
fester and breed on, and fawn on and give vanity ever more and more\
exquisite titillations. Holy Cross, my wife\'92s new spiritual guide, was\
past master of the pauper-making and pauper-utilizing arts. Its rector\
and his staff of slimy sycophants had the small standing army of its\
worthy poor trained to perfection. When my wife went down among them,\
she returned home with face aglow and eyes heavenly. What a treat those\
wretches had given her! And in the first blush of her enthusiasm she\
dispensed lavishly, where the older members of the church exacted the\
full measure of titillation for every dollar invested and awarded extra\
sums only to some novelty in lickspittling or toadeating.\
\
Were I not sure I should quite wear out the forbearance of gentle\
reader, I should linger to describe this marvelous charity plant for\
providing idle or social-position-hunting rich women with spiritual\
pleasures-- I had almost said debaucheries, but that would be intruding\
my private and perhaps prejudiced opinion. I have no desire to\
irritate, much less shake the faith of, those who believe in Holy Cross\
and its \'93uplift\'94 work. And I don\'92t suppose Holy Cross does any great\
amount of harm. The poor who prostitute themselves to its purposes are\
weak things, beyond redemption. As for the rich who waste time and\
money there, would they not simply waste elsewhere were there no Holy\
Cross?\
\
My wife was, at that time, a very ignorant woman, thinly covered with\
a veneer of what I now know was a rather low grade of culture. That\
veneer impressed me. It had impressed our Brooklyn friends of St.\
Mary\'92s. But I fancy it must have looked cheap to expert eyes. Where her\
surpassing shrewdness showed itself was in that she herself recognized\
her own shortcomings. Rare and precious is the vanity that comforts and\
sustains without self-deception. She knew she wasn\'92t the real thing,\
knew she had not yet got hold of the real thing. And when she began to\
move about, cautiously and quietly, in Holy Cross, she realized that at\
last she was in the presence of the real thing.\
\
My big responsibilities, my associations in finance, had been giving\
me a superb training in worldly wisdom. I think I had almost as strong\
a natural aptitude for \'93catching on\'94 to the better thing in speech and\
manner and in dress as had Edna. It is not self-flattery for me to\
say that up to the Holy Cross period I was further advanced than she.\
Certainly I ought to have been, for a man has a much better opportunity\
than a woman, and one of the essentials of equipment for great affairs\
is ability to observe accurately the little no less than the large.\
Looking back, I recall things which lead me to suspect that Edna saw my\
superiority in certain matters most important to her, and was irritated\
by it. However that may be, a few months in Holy Cross and she had\
grasped the essentials of the social art as I, or any other masculine\
man, never could grasp it. And her veneer of \'93middle-class\'94 culture\
disappeared under a thick and enduring coating of the best New York\
manner.\
\
\'93What has become of _you_?\'94 I said to her. \'93I haven\'92t seen you in\
weeks.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand,\'94 said she, ruffling as she always did when she\
suspected me of indulging in my coarse and detestable sense of humor.\
\
\'93Why, you don\'92t act like yourself at all,\'94 said I. \'93Even when we\'92re\
alone you give the uncomfortable sense of dressed-up--not as if _you_\
were \'91dressed-up,\'92 but as if _I_ were. I feel like a plowboy before a\
princess.\'94\
\
She was delighted!\
\
\'93You,\'94 I went on, \'93are now exactly like the rest of those women in\
Holy Cross. I suppose it\'92s all right to look and talk and act that way\
before people. At least, I\'92ve no objection if it pleases you. But for\
heaven\'92s sake, Edna, don\'92t spoil our privacy with it. The queen doesn\'92t\
wear her coronation robes all the time.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sure I don\'92t know what you mean,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Don\'92t you?\'94 cried I, laughing. \'93What a charming fraud you are!\'94 And\
I seized her in my arms and kissed her. And she seemed to yield and\
to return my caresses. But I was uncomfortable. She would not drop\
that new manner. The incident seems trifling enough; perhaps it was\
trifling. But it stands out in my memory. It marks the change in our\
relationship. I recall it all distinctly--how she looked, how young and\
charming and cold, what she was wearing, the delicate simple dress\
that ought to have made her most alluring to me, yet made me feel as if\
she were indeed alluring, but not for _me_. A subtle difference there,\
but abysmal; the difference between the woman who tries to make herself\
attractive for the sake of her husband and the woman who makes toilets\
in the conscious or half-conscious longing successfully to prostitute\
herself to the eyes of the public. I recall every detail of that\
incident; yet I have only the vaguest recollection of our beginning to\
occupy separate bedrooms. By that time the feeling of alienation must\
have grown so strong that I took the radical change in our habits as\
the matter of course.\
\
Many are the women, in all parts of the earth, who have sought to climb\
into the world of fashion by the broad and apparently easy stairway\
of charity. But most of them have failed because they were unaware\
of the secret of that stairway, an unsuspected secret which I shall\
proceed to point out. It seems, as I have said, a particularly easy\
stairway--broad, roomy, with invalid steps. It is, in fact, a moving\
stairway so cunningly contrived that she--it is usually she--who\
ascends keeps in the same place. She goes up, but at exactly her\
ascending rate the stairway goes down. She sees other women making\
apparently no more effort than she ascending rapidly, and presently\
entering the earthly heaven at the top. Yet there she stands, marking\
time, moving not one inch upward, and there she will stand until she\
wearies, relaxes her efforts, and finds herself rapidly descending.\
But how do the women who ascend accomplish it? I do not know. You must\
ask them. I only know the cause of the failure of the women who do\
not ascend. If I knew why the others succeeded I should not tell it. I\
would not deprive fashionable women of the joy of occupying a difficult\
height from which they can indulge themselves in the happiness of\
sneering and spitting down at their lowlier sisters. And I have no\
sympathy with the aspirations or the humiliations of those lowlier\
sisters.\
\
My energetic and aspiring wife presently found herself on this\
stairway, with no hint as to its secret, much less as to the way\
of overcoming its peculiarity. She toiled daily in Holy Cross. She\
subscribed to everything, she helped in everything. She was the proud\
recipient of the rector\'92s loud praises as his \'93most devoted, least\
worldly, most spiritual helper.\'94 But--not an invitation of the kind\
she wanted. Everyone was \'93just lovely\'94 to her. Whenever any charitable\
or spiritual matter was to be discussed, no matter how grand and\
exclusive the house in which the discussion was to be held, there was\
my wife in a place of honor, eagerly consulted--and urged to subscribe.\
But nothing unworldly. They understood how spiritual she was, did\
those sweet, good people. They knew Saint Edna wished no social\
frivolities--no dinners or theater parties, no bridge or dancing.\
\
She was a wise lady. She hid her burning impatience. She smiled\
and purred when she yearned to scowl and scratch. She waited, and\
prayed for some lucky accident that would swing her across the\
invisible, apparently nonexistent but actually impassable dead line.\
She had expected snubs and cold shoulders. Never a snub, never a\
cold shoulder. Always smiles and gracious handshakings and amiable\
familiarities, but those always of the kind that serve to accentuate\
caste distinction instead of removing it. For the first time in her\
life, I think, she was completely stumped. She could combat obstacles.\
She might even have found a way to fight fog. But how ridiculous to\
make struggles and thrust out fists when there is nothing but empty,\
sunny air!\
\
She held church lunches and dinners at our house--of course, had me on\
duty at the dinners. All in vain. The distinction between the spiritual\
and the temporal remained in force. The grand people came, acted as if\
they were delighted, complimented her on her house, on her hospitality,\
went away, to invite her to similar dreary functions at their houses.\
And my, how it did cost her! No wonder Holy Cross made a pet of her and\
elected me to the board of vestrymen.\
\
Once in a while she would find something in her net, so slyly cast, so\
softly drawn. She would have a wild spasm of joy; then the something\
would turn out to be another climber like herself. Those climbers\
avoided each other as devils dodge the font of holy water. The climber\
she would have caught would be one who, ignorant of the intricacies of\
New York society, was under the impression that the Mrs. Godfrey Loring\
so conspicuous in Holy Cross must be a social personage. They would\
examine each other--at a series of joyous entertainments each would\
provide for the other, would discover their mutual mistake--and-- You\
know the contemptuous toss with which the fisherman rids himself of a\
bloater; you know the hysterical leap of the released bloater back into\
the water.\
\
But how it was funny! My wife did not take me into her confidence as to\
her social struggles. She maintained with me the same sweet, elegant\
exterior of spiritual placidity with which she faced the rest of the\
world. Nevertheless, in a dim sort of way I had some notion of what\
she was about--though, as I was presently to discover, I was wholly\
mistaken in my idea of her progress.\
\
\'93What has happened to Mrs. Lestrange?\'94 I said to her one evening at\
dinner. \'93Is she ill?\'94\
\
She cast a quick, nervous glance in the direction of the butler. I,\
looking at him by way of a mirror, thought I saw upon his aristocratic\
countenance a faint trace of that insolent secret glee which fills\
servants when their betters are humiliated before them. \'93Mrs.\
Lestrange?\'94 she said carelessly. \'93Oh, I see her now and then.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92ve been inseparable until lately,\'94 said I. \'93A quarrel, I\
suppose?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 said my wife tartly.\
\
And she shifted abruptly to another subject. When I went to the little\
study adjoining my sitting room to smoke she came with me. There she\
said:\
\
\'93Please don\'92t mention Mrs. Lestrange before the servants again.\'94\
\
\'93Why, what\'92s up?\'94 said I. \'93Did she turn out to be a crook?\'94\
\
\'93Heavens, no! How coarse you are, Godfrey. Simply that I was terribly\
mistaken in her.\'94\
\
\'93She looked like a confidence woman or a madam,\'94 said I. \'93Didn\'92t you\
tell me she was a howling swell?\'94\
\
\'93I thought she was,\'94 said my wife, and I knew something important was\
coming; only that theory would account for her admitting she had made\
a mistake. \'93And in a way she was. But they caught her several years\
ago taking money to get some dreadful low Western people into society.\
Since then she\'92s asked--she herself--because she\'92s well connected and\
amusing. But she can\'92t help anyone else.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I see,\'94 said I. \'93And you don\'92t feel strong enough socially as yet\
to be able to afford the luxury of her friendship.\'94\
\
\'93Strong enough!\'94 said Edna with intense bitterness. \'93I have no position\
at all--none whatever.\'94\
\
I was surprised, for until that moment I had been assuming she was on\
or near the top of the wave, moving swiftly toward triumphant success.\
\'93You want too much,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ve really got all there is to get.\
At that last reception of yours you had all the heavy swells. My valet\
told me so.\'94\
\
\'93Reception to raise funds for the orphanage,\'94 said Edna with a vicious\
sneer--the unloveliest expression I had ever seen on her lovely\
face--and I had seen not a few unlovely expressions there in our many\
married years, some of them extremely trying years. \'93I tell you I am\
nobody socially. They take my money for their rotten old charities.\
They use me for their tiresome church work--and they do nothing for\
me--nothing! How I _hate_ them!\'94\
\
I sat smoking my cigar and watching her face. It was a wonderfully\
young face. Not that she was so old; on the contrary, she was still\
young in years. I call her face wonderfully young because it had that\
look of inexhaustible, eternal youth which is rare even in the faces\
of boys and girls. But that evening I was not thinking so much of her\
youth and her beauty as of a certain expression of hardness, of evil\
passions rampant--envy and hatred and jealousy, savage disappointment\
over defeats in sordid battles.\
\
\'93Edna,\'94 said I, hesitatingly, \'93why don\'92t you drop all that? Can\'92t you\
see there\'92s nothing in it? You\'92re tempting the worst things in your\
nature to grow and destroy all that\'92s good and sweet--all that makes\
you--and me--happy. People aren\'92t necessary to us. And if you must have\
friends, surely _all_ the attractive people in New York aren\'92t in that\
little fashionable set. Judging from what I\'92ve seen of them, they\'92re a\
lot of bores.\'94\
\
\'93They look bored here,\'94 retorted she. \'93And no wonder! They come as a\
Christian duty.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93Now, honestly, are those fashionable people the best\
educated, the best in any way--any real way? I\'92ve talked with the men,\
and the younger ones--the ones that go in for society--are unspeakable\
rotters. I wouldn\'92t have them about.\'94\
\
Edna\'92s eyes flashed, and her form quivered in a gust of hysterical\
fury--the breaking of long-pent passion, of anger and despair, taking\
me as an excuse for vent. \'93Oh, it\'92s terrible to be married to a man who\
_always_ misunderstands!--one who can\'92t sympathize!\'94 cried she. It was\
a remark she often made, but never before had she put so much energy,\
so much bitterness into it.\
\
\'93What do I misunderstand?\'94 I asked, more hurt than I cared to show.\
\'93Where don\'92t I sympathize?\'94\
\
\'93Let\'92s not talk about it!\'94 exclaimed she. \'93If I weren\'92t a remarkable\
woman I\'92d have given up long ago--I\'92d give up now.\'94\
\
Before you smile at her egotism, gentle reader, please remember that\
husband and wife were talking alone; also that with a few pitiful\
exceptions all human beings think surpassingly well of themselves, and\
do not hesitate to express that good opinion privately. I guess there\'92s\
more lying done about lack of egotism and of vanity generally than\
about all other matters put together.\
\
Said I: \'93You are indeed a wonder, dear. In this country one sees many\
astonishing transformations. But I doubt if there have been many equal\
to the transformation of the girl I married into the girl who\'92s sitting\
before me.\'94\
\
\'93And what good has it done me?\'94 demanded she. \'93How I\'92ve worked away at\
myself--inside and out--and all for nothing!\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve still got _me_,\'94 said I jovially, yet in earnest too. \'93Lots of\
women lose their husbands. I\'92ve never had a single impulse to wander.\'94\
\
In the candor of that intimacy she gave me a most unflattering look--a\
look a woman does well not to cast at a man unless she is more\
absolutely sure of him than anyone can be of anything in this uncertain\
world. I laughed as if I thought she meant that look as a jest; I put\
the look away in my memory with a mark on it that meant \'93to be taken\
out and examined at leisure.\'94 But she was absorbed in her chagrin over\
her social failure; she probably hardly realized I was there.\
\
\'93Well, what\'92s the next move?\'94 inquired I presently.\
\
\'93You\'92ve got to help,\'94 replied she--and I knew this was what she had\
been revolving in her mind all evening.\
\
\'93Anything that doesn\'92t take me away from business, or keep me up too\
late to fit myself for the next day.\'94\
\
\'93Business--always business,\'94 said she, in deepest disgust. \'93Do you\
_never_ think of anything else?\'94\
\
\'93My business and my family--that\'92s my life,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Not your family,\'94 replied she. \'93You care nothing about them.\'94\
\
\'93Edna,\'94 I said sharply, \'93that is unjust and untrue.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you give them money, if that\'92s what you mean,\'94 said she\
disdainfully.\
\
\'93And I give them love,\'94 said I. \'93The trouble is I give so freely that\
you don\'92t value it.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, you are a good husband,\'94 said she carelessly. \'93But I want you to\
take an interest.\'94\
\
\'93In your social climbing?\'94\
\
\'93How insulting you are!\'94 she cried, with flashing eyes. \'93I am trying to\
claim the position we are entitled to, and you speak of me as if I were\
one of those vulgar pushers.\'94\
\
\'93I beg your pardon,\'94 said I humbly. \'93I was merely joking.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve often told you that your idea of humor was revolting.\'94\
\
I felt distressed for her in her chagrin and despair. I was ready to\
bear almost anything she might see fit to inflict. \'93What do you want me\
to do?\'94 I asked. \'93Whatever it is, I\'92ll do it. Do you need more money?\'94\
\
\'93I need help--real help,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Money\'92s god over the realm of fashion, the same as it is over that\
of--of religion--of politics--or anything you please. And luckily I\'92ve\
got that little god in my employ, my dear.\'94\
\
\'93If you are so powerful,\'94 said she, \'93put me into fashionable\
society--make these people receive me and come to my house.\'94\
\
\'93But they do,\'94 I reminded her.\
\
\'93I mean _socially_,\'94 cried she. \'93_Can\'92t_ I make you understand? Why are\
business men so dumb at anything else? Compel these people to take me\
as one of them.\'94\
\
\'93Now, Edna, my dear,\'94 protested I, \'93be reasonable. How can I do that?\'94\
\
\'93Easily, if you\'92ve got real power,\'94 rejoined she. \'93It\'92s been done\
often, I\'92ve found out lately. At least half the leaders in society\
got in originally by compelling it. But you, going round among men\
intimately--you must know it--must have known all along. If you\'92d\
been the right sort of man I\'92d not have to humiliate myself by asking\
you--by saying these dreadful things.\'94 Her eyes were flashing and her\
bosom was heaving. \'93Women have hated men for less. But I must bear\
my cross. You insist on degrading me. Very well. I\'92ll let myself be\
degraded. I\'92ll say the things a decent man would not ask a woman to\
say----\'94\
\
\'93Edna, darling,\'94 I pleaded. \'93Honestly, I don\'92t understand. You\'92ll have\
to tell me. And it\'92s not degrading. We have no secrets from each other.\
We who love each other can say anything to each other--anything. What\
do you wish me to do?\'94\
\
\'93Use your power over the men. Frighten them into ordering their wives\
to invite us and to accept our invitations. You do business with a lot\
of the men, don\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You can benefit or injure them, as you please, can\'92t you?--can take\
money away from them--can put them in the way of making it?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I; \'93to a certain extent.\'94\
\
\'93And how do you use this power?\'94\
\
\'93In building up great enterprises. I am founding a city just now, for\
instance, where there was nothing but a swamp beside a lake, and----\'94\
\
\'93In making more and more money for yourself,\'94 she cut in, \'93you think\
only of yourself.\'94\
\
\'93And you--what do _you_ think of?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Not of myself,\'94 cried she indignantly. \'93Never of myself. Of Margot.\
Of you. Of the family. I am working to build _us_ up--to make _us_\
somebody and not mere low money grubbers.\'94\
\
I did not see it from her point of view. But I was not inclined to\
aggravate her excitement and anger.\
\
\'93Why shouldn\'92t you use your powers for some unselfish purpose?\'94 she\
went on. \'93Why not try to have higher ambition?\'94\
\
I observed her narrowly. She was sincere.\
\
\'93I want you to help me--for Margot\'92s sake, for your own sake,\'94 she went\
on in a kind of exaltation. \'93Margot is coming on. She\'92ll be out in less\
than three years. We\'92ve got to make a position for her.\'94\
\
\'93I thought, up there at Miss Ryper\'92s she was----\'94\
\
\'93That shows how little interest you take!\'94 cried Edna. \'93Don\'92t you know\
what is happening? Why, already the fashionable girls at her school are\
beginning to shy off from her----\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t be absurd!\'94 laughed I. \'93That simply could not be. She\'92s lovely,\
sweet, attractive in every way. Any girls anywhere would be proud to\
have her as a friend.\'94\
\
\'93How _can_ you be so ignorant of the world!\'94 cried Edna in a frenzy\
of exasperation. \'93Oh, you\'92ll drive me mad with your stupidity! Can\'92t\
you realize how _low_ fashionable people are. The girls who were\
her friends so long as they were all mere children are now taking a\
positive delight in snubbing her, because she\'92s so pretty and will be\
an heiress. It gives them a sense of power to treat her as an inferior,\
to make her suffer.\'94\
\
I flung away the cigar and sat up in the chair. \'93How long has this been\
going on?\'94 I demanded.\
\
\'93Nearly a year,\'94 replied my wife. \'93It began as soon as she lost her\
childishness and developed toward a woman. I\'92m glad I\'92ve roused you\
at last. So long as she was a mere baby they liked her--invited her\
to their children\'92s parties--came to hers. But now they\'92re dropping\
her. Oh, it\'92s maddening! They are so sweet and smooth, the vile little\
daughters of vile mothers!\'94\
\
\'93Incredible!\'94 said I. \'93Surely not those sweet, well-mannered girls\
I\'92ve seen here at her parties? _They_ couldn\'92t do that sort of thing.\
Why, what do those babies know about social position and such nonsense?\'94\
\
\'93What do they know? What _don\'92t_ they know?\'94 cried Edna, trembling\
with rage at her humiliation and at my incredulity. \'93You _are_ an\
innocent! There ought to be a new proverb--innocent as a married man.\
Why, nowadays the children begin their social training in the cradle.\
They soon learn to know a nurse or a butler from a lady or a gentleman\
before they learn to walk. They hear the servants talk. They hear their\
parents talk. Except innocent you everyone nowadays thinks and talks\
about these things.\'94\
\
\'93But Margot--our Margot--she doesn\'92t know!\'94 I said with conviction.\
\
Edna laughed harshly. \'93Know? What kind of mother do you think I am? Of\
course she knows. Haven\'92t I been teaching her ever since she began to\
talk? Why do you suppose I\'92ve always called her the little duchess?\'94\
\
\'93She suggests a superior little person,\'94 said I, groping vaguely.\
\
\'93She suggests a superior person because I gave her that name and\
brought her up to look and act and feel the part. She expects to be a\
real duchess some day--\'94 Edna reared proudly, and her voice rang out\
confidently as she added--\'93and she shall be!\'94\
\
I stared at her. It seemed to me she must be out of her mind. Oh, I was\
indeed innocent, gentle reader.\
\
\'93I\'92ve always treated her as a duchess, and have made the servants do\
it, and have trained her to treat them as if she were a duchess.\'94 A\
proud smile came into her face, transforming it suddenly back to its\
loveliness. \'93The first time I ever read about a duchess--read, knowing\
what I was reading about--I decided that I would have a daughter and\
that she should be a duchess.\'94\
\
At any previous time such a sally would have made me laugh. But not\
then, for I saw that she meant it profoundly, and for the first time I\
was realizing what had been going on in my family, all unsuspected by\
me.\
\
\'93But first,\'94 proceeded Edna, \'93she shall have the highest social\
position in New York. And you must help if I am to succeed.\'94 The\
fury burst into her face again. \'93Those little wretches, snubbing\
her!--dropping her! I\'92ll make them pay for it.\'94\
\
\'93Do you mean to tell me that Margot realizes all this?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Poor child, she\'92s wretched about it. Only yesterday she said to me:\
\'91Mamma, is it true that you and papa are very common, and that we\
haven\'92t anything but a lot of stolen money? One of the girls got mad at\
me because I was so good-looking and so proud, and taunted me with it.\'92\'94\
\
\'93Incredible!\'94 said I, dazed.\
\
\'93She\'92s horribly unhappy,\'94 Edna went on. \'93And it cuts her to the heart\
to be losing all her dearest friends. I did my duty and taught her\
which girls to cultivate, and she was intimate only with the right sort\
of New York girls.\'94\
\
\'93I expect she has been indiscreet,\'94 said I. \'93They\'92ve found out why she\
made friends with them and----\'94\
\
\'93You will drive me crazy!\'94 cried Edna. \'93_Can\'92t_ you understand? All\
the mothers and the governesses--all the grown people in respectable\
families teach the children. Those mothers who don\'92t teach it directly\
see that it\'92s taught by the governesses, or else select the proper\
friends for their little girls and see that they drop any who aren\'92t\
proper.\'94\
\
I dropped back in my chair. I was stunned. It seemed to me I had never\
heard anything quite so infamous in my life. And as I reflected on what\
she had said I wondered that I had not realized it before. I recalled\
a hundred significant facts that had come out in talks I had had with\
men, women, and children in this fashionable world from which we were\
excluded, yet with which we were in constant and close communication.\
\
\'93The question is, what are _you_ going to do,\'94 proceeded Edna.\
\
I shook my head, probably looking as dazed as I felt.\
\
\'93What does that headshake mean?\'94 demanded she.\
\
\'93_You_--taught _Margot_ to be a--a--like those other girls?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh, you fool!\'94 cried Edna. And in excuse for her, please remember I\
had ever been a dotingly bored slave of hers--as uxorious a husband\
as you ever saw--and therefore inevitably despised, for women have so\
little intelligence that they despise a man who loves them and lets\
them rule. \'93You fool!\'94 she repeated. \'93Yes, I brought her up like a\
lady--taught her to cultivate nice things and nice people. What should\
I teach her? To associate with common people? To drop back toward\
where we came from--where _you_ belong?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I guess I do,\'94 said I.\
\
Up to that time I had interested myself in only one aspect of human\
nature--the aspect that concerned me as a business man. But from that\
time I began to study the human animal in all his--and her--aspects.\
And it was not long before I learned what that animal is forced to\
become when exposed to the powerful thrusts and temptings of wealth\
and social position. In our alternations of pride and humility we\
habitually take undue credit or give undue blame to ourselves for what\
is wholly the result of circumstance. The truth is, we are like flocks\
of birds in a high wind. Some of us fly more steadily than others,\
some are quite beaten down, others seem almost self-directing; but\
all, great and small, weak and strong, are controlled by the wind, and\
those who make the best showing are those who adapt themselves most\
skillfully to the will of the wind.\
\
At the time when Edna and I were talking I had not become a\
philosopher. I was in the primitive stages of development in which most\
men and nearly all women remain their whole lives through--the stage in\
which you live, gentle reader, with your shallow mistaken notions of\
what is and your shallower mistaken notions of what ought to be. So, as\
Edna uncovered herself to me, I shrank in horror. It was fortunate--for\
her, at least--that I had always trained myself never to make hasty\
speeches. My expertness in that habit has probably been the principal\
cause of my business success, of my ability to outwit even abler men\
than myself. I did not yield to the impulse to burst out against her.\
I compressed my lips and silently watched as she lifted the veil over\
our family life and revealed to me the truth about it.\
\
\'93What are you going to do?\'94 she asked impatiently, yet with a certain\
uneasiness born no doubt of a something in my manner that made her\
vaguely afraid, for while she knew I was her slave and despised me, as\
I was to learn, for being so weak before a mere woman, she also knew\
that, outside of her domain, I was not her slave nor anybody\'92s, but\
planned and executed at the pleasure of my own will.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know what I\'92m going to do,\'94 said I slowly. \'93I must think. All\
this is new to me.\'94\
\
\'93If you haven\'92t any pride in yourself, or in me,\'94 said she, \'93still you\
surely must have pride for Margot.\'94\
\
\'93I think so,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93If you could know how they have made the poor child suffer!\'94\
\
I made no reply, nor did I encourage her to talk further. In fact, when\
she began again I stopped her with: \'93I\'92ve heard enough, my dear. And\
I\'92ve some important business to attend to.\'94\
\
She, preparing to leave me alone with my papers, came and put her\
arms round my neck and pressed her cheek against mine. I think she\
was uneasy about the posture of the affair in my mind--feared stupid\
commercial I could not appreciate these vital things of life. I suspect\
my tranquil reception of her caresses did not tend to allay her\
uneasiness. Never before had she failed to interest me in her physical\
self; and the only reason she then failed was that in the general\
upsetting of all my ideas of what my family life was there had been\
tossed up to the surface an undefined suspicion of her sincerity as a\
wife. I was not altogether blind as to the relations of men and women,\
as to the fact that women often coolly played upon the passions of men\
for their own purposes of money getting in its various forms. My wife\
was right in her sneer at the innocence of married men. But there are\
exceptions, and a woman with a husband intelligent in every way except\
in seeing through women would do well to take care how she tempts his\
intelligence to shake off its indifference in that respect.\
\
The next morning I was breakfasting alone as usual. No, gentle reader,\
I am not girding at my poor wife as you hastily accuse. I am sure I do\
not deceive myself when I say I never was of those men who fuss about\
trifles. Thank heaven, as soon as we had a servant my wife kept away\
from breakfast. It was one of the things I loved her for. If I had\
been married to a woman who appeared at breakfast looking lovely and\
smiling sweetly, I should have become a bad-tempered tyrant. I want no\
sentimentalities in the early-morning hours. I wake up uncomfortable\
and sour, and I quarrel with myself and look about for trouble until I\
have had something to eat and coffee. Further in the same direction, I\
took particular pleasure in my wife\'92s small personal slovenlinesses,\
in her curl papers, in her occasional overlaying of her face with cold\
cream and the like, in her careless negligee worn in her own rooms.\
There is, I guess, no nature so prodigal that it has not some small\
economies. Edna had, probably still has, a fondness for wearing out\
thoroughly, in secluded privacy, house dresses, underclothes, and night\
gowns.\
\
It took nothing from my delight in her beauty that she was not\
invariably beautiful. I\'92ve rarely seen her lovely early in the morning.\
Who is? I should have taken habitual early-morning loveliness as a\
personal insult. I\'92ve seen her homely all day long, and for several\
days at a time. She was as attractive to me than as at her most\
beautiful. I detest monotony. Thank heaven, she was never monotonous\
to look at; one rather expects _mental_ monotony in women unless one\
is a fool. I didn\'92t mind her times of homeliness, because she could be\
so far, far the opposite of homely. I did not mind her way of getting\
herself up in odds and ends, mussily, but, mind you, never after the\
Passaic days unclean--never! I did not mind her dishevelments because,\
when she set out to dress, she did it so bang up well. She was born\
with a talent for dress; she rapidly developed it into an art. You know\
what I mean. You\'92ve seen the girl with hardly five dollars\'92 worth of\
clothing on her, including the hat, yet making the woman from the best\
dressmaker in Paris look a frump.\
\
I never had to join the innumerable and pitiful army of men who give\
the woman their money to squander upon bad fits and bad taste, and are\
bowed down with shame when they have to issue forth with her. I can\
honestly say, and Edna will bear me out, that I gave her money freely.\
No doubt the reason in part was I found it so easy to make money that\
I was indifferent to extravagance. But the chief reason, I believe,\
was Edna\'92s skill at dress. The woman who is physically alluring to her\
husband, and who knows how to dress, rarely has difficulty in getting\
money from him, though he be a miser. But, gentle lady reader, can you\
in your heart blame a man for grudging his earnings to a woman who\
isn\'92t fit to dress and who doesn\'92t know how, either?\
\
As I had begun to tell when I interrupted myself, I was breakfasting\
alone the morning after that memorable talk with Edna, and Margot came\
down to glance in for a smile at me on her way to school.\
\
In theory Margot was still classed as a child, and would be so classed\
for two years longer. In fact she was, and had been for two years and\
more, a full-fledged young lady. That is the way American children of\
the rank for which my wife was training Margot are being brought up\
nowadays. She had her own apartment, dressing room and bath, sitting\
room, reception room--as many rooms as my wife and I had altogether\
when we began married life, and about four times the room. As for\
luxury, a comparison would be ridiculous. Also Margot had her own staff\
of servants--companion, maid, maid\'92s assistant--and her own automobile\
with chauffeur, used by no one else. It would be hard to find more\
helpless creatures than these young aspirants to aristocracy. And they\
prided themselves upon their ignorance of the realities, and their\
mothers, often with hypocritical pretense of distress, boasted it. At\
that time I thought it amusing. The serious side of it was entirely out\
of my range. We American men of the comfortable and luxurious classes\
are addicted to the habit of regarding our wives and children as\
toys, as mere sources of amusement not to be taken seriously. It isn\'92t\
strange that the children should not mind this, but what a commentary\
upon the real mentality of the women that they tolerate and encourage\
it! Our women are always, with a fine show of earnestness, demanding\
that they be taken seriously. But woe unto the man who believes them\
in earnest and tries to treat them as his equals instead of as dainty\
toys, odalisques. How he will be denounced, hated, and, if proper\
alimony can be got, divorced!\
\
Margot\'92s parties differed in no respect from grown-up parties, except\
that there were restrictions in the matter of hours and also as to the\
serving of drinks. For, I believe my wife did not follow the extreme\
of fashionable custom, but forbade wines and punch at these parties.\
In this matter, as in the matter of using slang and in many others,\
she held that only people of long-established social position, people\
with what is called tradition, could safely make excursions beyond the\
bounds of conventionality; that it was safest, wisest for people like\
herself to stay well within the bounds, to be prim even, and so to\
avoid any possible criticism as vulgar. A very shrewd woman was Edna.\
If her intelligence had been equal to her shrewdness and energy, and if\
she had possessed a gleam of the sense of humor! However----\
\
In no essential respect did Margot\'92s routine of life differ from\
that of her mother--and her mother\'92s routine of inane and worthless\
time-killing was modeled exactly upon that of all the fashionable\
women and apers of fashionable women. Edna did a vast amount of\
studying, with and without teachers. It was all shallow and showy.\
Margot\'92s studies were also beneath contempt. I amused myself from time\
to time by inquiring--with pretense of gravity--into what they were\
teaching her at the Ryper school for the turning out of fashionable\
womanhood. Such a mess of trash! She was learning much about social\
usages, from how to sit in a carriage--a rare art that, I assure you,\
gentle reader--to how to receive guests at a large dinner. She was\
studying some of the vulgarities--science, history, literature, and the\
like--but in no vulgar way. She would get only the thinnest smatter\
of talkable stuff about them--nothing \'93unsettling,\'94 nothing that\
might possibly rouse the mind to think or distract the attention from\
the \'93high\'94 things of life. She was dabbling in music, in drawing, in\
several similar costly fripperies. And the sum total of expense!--well,\
no wonder Miss Ryper was fast becoming as rich as some of the asteroids\
in the plutocracy she adored.\
\
I regarded Margot\'92s education as a species of joke. It never occurred\
to me that our pretty baby had the right to be educated to become a\
wife and a mother. And why should it have occurred to me? Where is that\
being done? Who is thinking of it? In all the oceans of twaddle about\
the elevation of woman where is there a drop of good sense about _real_\
education? You say I was criminally negligent as to my daughter\'92s\
education. But how about your own? The truth is, we all still look upon\
education as a frill, an ornament. We never think of it, whether for\
our sons or for our daughters, as nothing more or less than teaching a\
human being how to live. It is high time to end this idiotic ignorant\
exaltation of tomfoolery into culture!\
\
Poor Margot! How the little girls in plain clothes--and machine-made\
underwear--must have envied her as she swept along in her limousine,\
dressed with that enormously costly simplicity which only the rich\
can afford. No wonder many of the other girls at the Ryper school\
hated her. For, her mother was in one respect unlike most of the\
fashionable mothers who are too busy doing things not worth doing to\
attend to their children. Her mother gave her loving care, spent many\
hours--of anxious thought, no doubt--in planning to make her the most\
luxurious, the most helpless, the most envied girl in the school. We\
hear unendingly about the good that love does in the world. Not too\
much--no, indeed! But at the same time might it not be well if we also\
heard about the harm love can do--and does? How many sons and daughters\
have been ruined by loving parents! How many husbands have been wrecked\
by the flatteries and the assiduities of loving wives! How many wives\
have been lured to decay and destruction by the over-indulgent love of\
their husbands! What we need in this world is not more sentiment, but\
more intelligence. Sentiment is a force that rushes far and crazily\
in _both_ directions, gentle reader, unless it has well-balanced\
intelligence to guide it.\
\
Margot, smiling in the doorway of the breakfast room, put me at once\
into a less somber humor. She was tall and slim--an inch taller than\
her mother and with the same supple, well-proportioned figure. She\
had her mother\'92s small, tip-tilted face and luminous eyes, but they\
were of an intense dark gray that gave her an expression of poetic\
thoughtfulness and mystery. Whiter or more perfectly formed teeth I\
have never seen. In former days children\'92s teeth were neglected. But\
my wife, with her peculiar reach for all matters having to do with\
appearances, had learned the modern methods of caring for the body when\
Margot was still in the period when the body is almost as formable as\
sculptor\'92s clay. Thus Margot\'92s teeth had been looked after and made\
perfect and kept so. Her hair hung loose upon her shoulders like a\
wonderful changeable veil of golden brown. Often at first glance you\
are dazzled by these carefully fed and carefully groomed children of\
the rich, only to note at the second glance that the best showing has\
been made of precious little in the way of natural charm. But this was\
not true of Margot. The longer you looked, and the more attentively,\
the finer she seemed to be--like a rare perfect specimen from a\
connoisseur\'92s greenhouses. There\'92s no doubt about it, Edna did know\
the physical side of life. She would have got notable results even had\
we been poor. As it was, with all the money she cared to spend, she\
performed what looked like miracles.\
\
\'93Come and kiss me, Margot,\'94 said I.\
\
She obeyed, with a charming air of restrained eagerness that is\
regarded as ladylike. \'93My car is waiting,\'94 said she. \'93I\'92m late.\'94\
\
\'93Is that Therese\'94--her maid--\'93out in the hall waiting to go with you?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. Miss Parnell\'94--her companion--\'93has a headache, poor creature!\'94\
\
Margot had caught to perfection the refined, elegant, fashionable tone\
of speaking of the servile classes. Though I was in a critical mood\
that morning, I was not critical of my beloved little Margot, and her\
airs entertained me as much as ever. Said I:\
\
\'93Sit down, little duchess\'94--the familiar name slipped out\
unconsciously--\'93and talk to me a few minutes.\'94\
\
\'93But I\'92m shockingly late, papa,\'94 pleaded she.\
\
\'93No matter. I\'92ll telephone Miss Ryper, if you wish.\'94 To the butler, who\
was serving me: \'93Sackville, go tell Therese that I\'92m detaining Miss\
Margot. And close the door behind you.\'94\
\
Sackville retired. Margot seated herself with alacrity. She did not\
like her useless school any better than other children like more\
or less useful schools. \'93Are you taking me to the theater Saturday\
afternoon, as you promised?\'94 said she. \'93And do get a box and let me ask\
two of the girls.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly,\'94 said I. \'93If I can\'92t go, Miss Parnell will chaperon you.\'94\
\
\'93No, I want you, papa. It\'92s so nice to have a man.\'94\
\
\'93How are you getting on at school? Not with the studies\'94--I laughed\
at the absurdity of calling her fiddle-faddle studies--\'93but with the\
girls?\'94\
\
Her face clouded. \'93Has mamma told you?\'94\
\
\'93Told me what?\'94\
\
She hesitated.\
\
\'93Go on, dear,\'94 said I. \'93What\'92s the trouble?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, it\'92s always the same thing,\'94 she sighed, with a grown-up air\
that was both humorous and pathetic. \'93Some of the girls are down on\
me--about--about social position. You see, we don\'92t go _socially_ with\
their families.\'94\
\
\'93Why should we?\'94 said I. \'93We don\'92t know them nor they us. Naturally,\
they don\'92t care anything about us, nor we about them.\'94\
\
She hung her head. \'93But I want to go with them,\'94 said she doggedly.\
\
\'93Why?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Because--because--it\'92s the proper thing to do. If you don\'92t go with\
them everybody looks down on you.\'94 She lifted her head, and her\
flashing eyes reminded me of her mother. \'93It makes me just _wild_ to be\
looked down on.\'94\
\
\'93I should say so,\'94 said I. \'93Those little girls at Miss Ryper\'92s must\
be an ill-bred lot. We must take you away from there and put you in a\
school with nice girls.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no, father!\'94 she cried in a panic. \'93Those girls are the\
_nicest_--the only nice girls in any school in New York. All the other\
schools look up to ours. I\'92d cry my eyes out in any other school.\'94\
\
\'93Why?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92d feel--_low_.\'94 Her eyes had filled and her cheeks were flushed.\
\'93I\'92d be out of place except among the richest and most aristocratic\
girls.\'94\
\
\'93But you don\'92t like them,\'94 said I gently. I began to feel a sensation\
of sickness at the heart.\
\
\'93I _hate_ them!\'94 cried she with passionate energy. \'93But I want to stay\
on there and _make_ them be friendly with me. I\'92ve got too much pride,\
papa, to run away.\'94\
\
\'93Pride,\'94 said I, and my tone must have been sad. \'93That isn\'92t pride,\
dear. You ought to choose your friends by liking. You ought to feel\
above girls with such cheap ideas.\'94\
\
\'93But I\'92m not above them,\'94 protested she. \'93And I couldn\'92t like any girl\
I\'92d be ashamed to be seen with, unless she were a sort of servant. Oh,\
papa, you don\'92t appreciate how proud I am.\'94\
\
\'93Proud of what, dear? Of your parents? Of yourself?\'94\
\
She hung her head.\
\
\'93Of what, dear?\'94 I urged.\
\
\'93It hurts me not to be treated as--as the inside clique of girls in\
our secret society treat each other.\'94 She was almost crying. \'93They\
don\'92t even call me by my first name any more. They speak to me as Miss\
Loring--and _so_ politely--exactly as I speak to Miss Parnell or one of\
the teachers or a servant. Oh, I\'92m so proud! I\'92d love to be like Gracie\
Fortescue. She speaks even to Miss Ryper as I would to Miss Parnell.\'94\
\
My digestion wasn\'92t any too good, even in those days. My whole\
breakfast suddenly went wrong--turned to poison inside me, I suppose.\
A hot wave of rage against I knew not whom or what rolled up into my\
brain. I pushed away my plate abruptly. \'93Run along, child,\'94 I said in a\
hoarse voice I did not recognize as my own.\
\
She threw her arms round my neck with a gesture and an expression that\
made me realize how close a copy of her mother she was. \'93You wouldn\'92t\
take me away from my school, would you, papa dear?\'94 she pleaded.\
\
\'93All I want is to make you happy,\'94 said I, patting and stroking that\
thick and lovely veil of flowing hair.\
\
She assumed that I meant she was to stay on with the viperous Ryper\
brood, and went away almost happy. She had awakened to the fact that\
there were fates even worse than being snubbed and addressed like a\
teacher or a companion or a servant or some other lower animal--yes,\
far worse fates. For instance, not being able to feel that she was,\
on whatever degrading terms, at least associated with the adored\
fashionables.\
\
That evening when my wife again accompanied me to my study, after\
dinner, I said to her:\
\
\'93I\'92ve been turning over our talk last night. I haven\'92t been able to\
reach a conclusion as yet, except on one point. I can\'92t help you\
socially in the way you suggested.\'94\
\
I glanced at her as I said this. She was looking at me. Her pale,\
intense expression fascinated me.\
\
\'93I don\'92t think you have thought about it fully,\'94 said she slowly.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I, with my utmost deliberateness; \'93and my decision is\
final.\'94\
\
She rose, stood beside her chair, rubbing her hand softly along the top\
of the back. \'93Very well,\'94 said she quietly. And she left me alone.\
\
\
\
\
V\
\
\
In refusing Edna her heart\'92s desire thus promptly and tersely I had an\
object. I assumed she would protest and argue; in the discussion that\
would follow some light might come to me, utterly befogged as to what\
course to take about my family affairs. I knew something should be\
done--something quick and drastic. But what? It was no new experience\
to me to be faced with complex and well-nigh impossible situations.\
My business life had been a succession of such experiences. And\
while I had learned much as to handling them, I had also learned how\
dangerous it is to rush in recklessly and to begin action before one\
has discovered what to do--and what _not_ to do. The world is full of\
Hasty Hals and Hatties who pride themselves on their emergency minds,\
on knowing just what to do in any situation the instant it arises; and\
fine spectacles they are, lying buried and broken amid the ruins they\
have aggravated if not created.\
\
How recover my wife? How rescue my daughter? I could think of no\
plan--of no beginning toward a plan. And when Edna, by receiving my\
refusal in cold silence, defeated my hope of a possibly illuminating\
discussion, I did not know which way to turn.\
\
Why had I refused to help her in the way she suggested? Not on moral\
grounds, gentle reader. There I should have been as free from scruple\
as you yourself would have been, as you perhaps have been in your\
social climbing or maneuvering in your native town, wherever it is.\
Nor yet through fear of failure. I did not know the social game, but\
I did know something of human nature. And I had found out that the\
triumphant class, far from being the gentlest and most civilized, as\
its dominant position in civilization would indicate, was in fact the\
most barbarous, was saturated with the raw savage spirit of the right\
of might. I am speaking of actualities, not of pretenses--of deeds,\
not of words. To find a class approaching it in frank savagery of\
will and action you would have to descend through the social strata\
until you came to the class that wields the blackjack and picks\
pockets and dynamites safes. The triumphant class became triumphant\
not by refinement and courtesy and consideration, but by defiance of\
those fundamentals of civilization--by successful defiance of them.\
It remained the triumphant class by keeping that primal savagery\
of nature. As soon as any member of it began to grow tame--gentle,\
considerate, except where consideration for others would increase his\
own wealth and power, became really a disciple of the sweet gospel he\
professed and urged upon others--just so soon did he begin to lose his\
wealth into the strong unscrupulous hands ever reaching for it--and\
with waning wealth naturally power and prestige waned.\
\
No, I did not refuse because I thought the triumphant class would\
contemptuously repel any attempt to carry its social doors by assault.\
I saw plainly enough that I could compel enough of these society\
leaders to receive my wife and daughters to insure their position. You\
have seen swine gathered about a trough, comfortably swilling; you have\
seen a huge porker come running with angry squeal to join the banquet.\
You have observed how rudely, how fiercely he is resented and fought\
off by the others. This, until he by biting and thrusting has made a\
place for himself; then the fact that he is an intruder and the method\
of his getting a place are forgotten, and the swilling goes peacefully\
forward. So it is, gentle reader, though it horrifies your hypocrisy to\
be told it, so do human beings conduct themselves round a financial or\
political or social swill trough. I should have had small difficulty\
in biting and kicking a satisfactory place for Edna and Margot at the\
social swill trough; I should have had no difficulty at all in keeping\
it for them. But----\
\
You will be incredulous, gentle reader, devoured of snobbishness and\
dazzled by what you have heard and read of the glories of fashionable\
society in the metropolis. You will be incredulous, because you, too,\
like the overwhelming majority of the comfortable classes in this great\
democracy--and many of the not so comfortable classes as well--because\
you, too, are infected of the mania for looking about for some one who\
refuses to associate with you on the ground that you are \'93common,\'94\
and for straightway making it your heart\'92s dearest desire to compel\
that person to associate with you. You will be incredulous when I tell\
you my sole reason was my hatred and horror of what seemed to me the\
degrading, vulgar, and rotten longings that filled my wife and that had\
infected my daughter. That hatred and horror had thrown me into a state\
of mind I did not dare confess to myself. You are incredulous; but\
perhaps you will admit I may be truthful when I explain that the reason\
for my moral and sentimental revolt was perhaps in large part my dense\
ignorance of the whole society side of life.\
\
No doubt in the Passaic public school of my boyhood there had been as\
much snobbishness as there is in Fifth Avenue. But I had somehow never\
happened to notice it. It must have been there; it must be elemental\
in human nature; how else account for my wife? We hear more about the\
snobbishness of Fifth Avenue than we do about the snobbishness of the\
tenements. But that is solely because Fifth Avenue is more conspicuous.\
Also, Fifth Avenue, supposedly educated, supposedly broadened by\
knowledge and taste, has no excuse for petty vanities that belong only\
to the ignorant. And if Fifth Avenue were really educated, really had\
knowledge and taste, it could not be snobbish. However, my busy life\
had never been touched by social snobbishness. I preferred to know\
and to associate with men better educated and richer than I, but for\
excellent practical reasons--because from such men I could get the\
knowledge and the wealth I needed. But I would not have wasted a moment\
of my precious time upon the men most exalted in fashionable life--the\
ignorant incompetents who had inherited their wealth. They seemed\
ridiculous and worthless to me, a man of thought and action.\
\
So, the sudden exposure of my wife\'92s and my little girl\'92s disease gave\
me a shock hardly to be measured by the man or woman used all his life\
to the social craze. It was much as if I had suddenly seen upon their\
bared bosoms the disgusting ravages of cancer.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
As I could not devise any line of action that, however faintly,\
promised results, I kept away from home. I absorbed myself in some new\
enterprises that filled my evenings, which I spent at my club with the\
men I drew into them. At the mention of club, gentle reader, I see your\
ears pricking. You are wondering what sort of club _I_ belonged to. I\
shall explain.\
\
It was the Amsterdam Club. You may have seen and gawked at its vast and\
imposing red sandstone front in middle Fifth Avenue. As you drove by in\
the \'93rubber-neck\'94 wagon, the man with the megaphone may have shouted:\
\'93The Amsterdam Club, otherwise known as the Palace of Plutocracy. The\
total wealth of its members is one tenth of the total wealth of the\
United States. Every great millionaire in New York City belongs to it.\
The reason you see no one in the magnificent windows is because the\
plutocrats are afraid of cranks with pistol or bomb.\'94 And you stared\
and envied and craned your neck backward as the sight-seeing car rolled\
on. A fairly accurate description of my club. But you will calm as I\
go on to tell you the inside truth about it. It was built to provide\
a club for those rich men of New York who had no social position, and\
so could not be admitted to the fashionable clubs. It was not built by\
those outcasts for whom it was intended, but by the rich men of the\
fashionable world. They did not build it out of pity nor yet out of\
generosity, but for freedom and convenience.\
\
You must know that the rich, both the fashionables and the excludeds,\
are intimately associated in business. Now, in the days before the\
Amsterdam Club, if a rich fashionable wished to talk business out of\
office hours with a rich unfashionable, he had to take him to his\
home or to his club, one or the other. You will readily appreciate\
that either course involved disagreeable complications. The rich\
unfashionable would say: \'93Why am I not invited to this snob\'92s house\
_socially_? Why does not this hound see that I am elected to his\
elegant club? I\'92ll teach this wrinkle-snout how to spit at me.\
I\'92ll slip a stiletto into his back, damn him.\'94 As the number of\
rich unfashionables increased, as the number of stealthy financial\
stilettoings for social insult grew and swelled, the demand for a\
\'93way out\'94 became more clamorous and panicky. The final result was\
the Amsterdam Club--perhaps by inspiration, perhaps by accident. And\
so it has come to pass that now, when a rich fashionable wishes to\
talk finance with a rich pariah, he does not have to run the risk of\
defiling his home or his exclusive club. With the gracious cordiality\
wherefor aristocracy is famed in song and story, he says: \'93Let us go\
to _our_ club\'94--for, the rich fashionables see to it that every rich\
pariah is elected to the Amsterdam immediately he becomes a person of\
financial consequence. And I fancy that not one in ten of the rich\
pariah members dreams how he is being insulted and tricked. All, or\
nearly all, imagine they are elected by favor of the great fashionable\
plutocrats to about the most exclusive club in New York. Also, not one\
in a dozen of the fashionable members appreciates how he is degrading\
himself--for, to my quaint mind, the snob degrades only himself.\
\
Well! Not many months after we moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan I\
was elected to the Amsterdam--I, in serene ignorance of the trick\
that was being played upon me by my sponsors, associates in large\
financial deals and members of several exclusive really fashionable\
clubs. They pulled regretful faces as they talked of the \'93long waiting\
lists at most of the clubs.\'94 They brightened as they spoke of the\
Amsterdam--\'93the finest and, take it all round, the most satisfactory\
of the whole bunch, old man. And we believe we\'92ve got pull enough to\
put you in there pretty soon. We\'92ll work it, somehow.\'94 If I had known\
the shrivel-hearted trick behind their genial friendliness, I should\
not have minded, should probably have laughed. For, human littlenesses\
do not irritate me; and I have a vanity--I prefer to call it a\
pride--that lifts me out of their reach. I am of the one aristocracy\
that is truly exclusive, the only one that needs no artificial\
barriers to keep it so. But I shall not bore you, gentle reader, by\
explaining about it. You are interested only in the aristocracies of\
rank and title and wealth that are nothing but the tawdry realization\
of the tawdry fancies of the yokel among his kine and the scullery\
maid among her pots. For, who but a tossed-up yokel or scullery maid\
would indulge in such vulgarities as sitting upon a gold throne or\
living in a draughty, cheerless palace or seeking to make himself\
more ridiculous by aggravating his littleness with a title, like the\
ass in the lion\'92s skin? Did it ever occur to you, gentle reader, that\
aristocracy is essentially common, essentially vulgar? To a large\
vision the distinction between king and carpenter, between the man with\
a million dollars and the million men with one dollar looks trivial and\
unimportant. Only a squat and squinting soul in a cellar and blinking\
through the twilight could discover agitating differences of rank\
between Fifth Avenue and Grand Street, between first floor front and\
attic rear, between flesh ripening to rot in silk and flesh ripening\
to rot in cotton. To an infinitesimal insect an infinite gulf yawns\
between the molecules of a razor\'92s edge.\
\
I often found my club a convenience, for in those busiest days of my\
financial career I had much private conferring--or conspiring, if you\
choose. Never had I found it so convenient as when for the first time\
there was pain and shrinking at the thought of going home, of seeing\
my wife and Margot. My Margot! When she was a baby how proudly I had\
wheeled her along the sidewalks of Passaic in the showy perambulator\
we bought for her--and the twenty-five dollars it cost loomed mighty\
big even to Edna. And in Brooklyn, what happy Sundays Edna and I had\
had with her, when I would hire a buggy at the livery stable round the\
corner and we would go out for the day to some Long Island woods; or\
when we would take her down to the respectable end of Coney Island to\
dig in the sand and to wade after the receding tide. My Margot! No\
longer mine; never again to be mine.\
\
One evening I had an appointment at the Amsterdam with a Western\
millionaire, Charles Murdock, whom I had interested in a Canada railway\
to tap a Hudson Bay spruce forest. He was having trouble with his\
wife and something of it had come out in the afternoon newspapers. At\
the last moment his secretary--who, by the way, afterwards married\
the divorced Mrs. Murdock--telephoned that Murdock could not keep\
his engagement to dine. I looked about for some one to help me eat\
the dinner I had ordered. There are never many disengaged men in the\
Amsterdam. The fashionable rich come only when they have business with\
the pariahs. The pariahs prefer their own houses or the barrooms and\
caf\'e9s of the big hotels. I therefore thought myself lucky when I found\
Bob Armitage sulking in a huge leather chair and got him to share my\
dinner. Armitage was one of my railway directors. He had helped me\
carry through the big stroke that made me, had joined in half a dozen\
of my enterprises in all of which I had been successful. There was no\
man of my acquaintance I knew and liked so well as Armitage. Yet it had\
so happened that we had never talked much with each other, except about\
business.\
\
It promised to be a silent dinner. He was as deep in his thoughts as\
I was in mine--and our faces showed that neither of us was cogitating\
anything cheerful. On impulse I suddenly said:\
\
\'93Bob, do you know about fashionable New York society?\'94\
\
I knew that he did; that is to say, I had often heard he was one of\
the heavy swells, having all three titles to fashion--wealth, birth,\
and marriage. But I now pretended ignorance of the fact; when you wish\
to inform yourself thoroughly on a subject you should always select an\
expert, tell him you know nothing and bid him enlighten you from the\
alphabet up.\
\
\'93Why do you ask?\'94 said Armitage. \'93Do you want to get in? I had a notion\
you didn\'92t care for society--you and your wife.\'94\
\
Armitage didn\'92t go to Holy Cross, but to St. Bartholomew\'92s. So he had\
never known of my wife\'92s activities, knew only the sort of man I was.\
\
\'93Oh, I forgot,\'94 he went on. \'93You\'92ve a daughter almost grown. I suppose\
you want her looked after. All right. I\'92ll attend to it for you. Your\
wife won\'92t mind my wife\'92s calling? I\'92d have sent her long ago--in fact,\
I apologize for not having done it. But I hate the fashionable crowd.\
They bore me. However, your wife may like them. Women usually do.\'94\
\
It was at my lips to thank him and decline his offer. Then it flashed\
into my mind that perhaps my one hope of getting back my wife and\
daughter, of restoring them to sanity, lay in letting them have what\
they wanted. Another sort of man might have deluded himself with the\
notion that he could set his foot down, stamp out revolt, compel his\
family to do as he willed. But I happen not to be of that instinctively\
tyrannical and therefore inherently stupid temperament.\
\
Armitage ate in silence for a few moments, then said:\
\
\'93I\'92ll have you elected to the Federal Club.\'94\
\
\'93This club is all I need,\'94 said I.\
\
He smiled sardonically. I didn\'92t understand that smile then, because I\
didn\'92t know anything about caste in New York. \'93You let me look after\
you,\'94 said he. \'93You\'92re a child in the social game.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve no objection to remaining so,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Quite right. There\'92s nothing in it,\'94 said he. \'93But you must remember\
you\'92re living in a world of rather cheap fools, and they are impressed\
by that nothing. On the other side of the Atlantic the social prizes\
have a large substantial value. Over here the value\'92s small. Still it\'92s\
something. You wouldn\'92t refuse even a trading stamp, would you?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93I refuse nothing,\'94 said I. \'93I take whatever\'92s offered me.\
If I find I don\'92t want it, why, what\'92s easier than to throw it away?\'94\
\
\'93Then I\'92ll put you in the Federal Club. You could have made me do it,\
if you had happened to want it. So, why shouldn\'92t I do it anyhow, in\
appreciation of your forbearance? You don\'92t realize, but I\'92m doing for\
you what about two thirds of the members of this club would lick my\
boots to get me to do for them.\'94\
\
\'93I had no idea the taste for shoe polish was so general here,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s a human taste, my dear Loring,\'94 replied he. \'93It\'92s as common as\
the taste for bread. All the men have it. As for the women they like\
nothing so well. Having one\'92s boots licked is the highest human joy.\
Next comes licking boots.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t believe that?\'94 said I, for his tone was almost too bitter\
for jest.\
\
\'93You aren\'92t acquainted with your kind, old man,\'94 retorted he.\
\
\'93I don\'92t know the kind you know,\'94 said I. And then I remembered my wife\
and my daughter. There must be truth in what Armitage had said; for,\
my beautiful wife and my sweet daughter, both looking so proud--surely\
they could not be rare exceptions in their insensibility to what seemed\
to me elemental self-respect.\
\
\'93You don\'92t know your kind,\'94 he went on, \'93because you don\'92t indulge in\
cringing and don\'92t encourage it. You\'92re like the cold, pure-minded\
woman who goes through the world imagining it a chaste and austere\
place because her very face silences and awes sensuality. You are part\
of the small advance guard of a race that is to come.\'94 He grinned\
satirically. \'93Perhaps you\'92ll drop out in the next few months. We\'92ll\
see.\'94\
\
When the silence was again broken, it was broken by me. \'93Do you know a\
school kept by a woman named Ryper?\'94 I inquired.\
\
\'93Sure I do,\'94 replied he. He gave me a shrewd laughing glance. \'93The\
daughter isn\'92t learning anything?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing but mischief,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93That\'92s what Ryper\'92s for. But what does it matter? Why should a woman\
learn anything? They\'92re of no consequence. The less a man has to do\
with them the better off he will be.\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re of the highest consequence,\'94 said I bitterly. \'93They have the\
control of the coming generation.\'94\
\
\'93And a hell of a generation it\'92s to be,\'94 cried he, suddenly rousing\
from the state of bored apathy in which he seemed to pass most of his\
time. \'93You\'92ve got me started on the subject that\'92s a craze with me. I\
have only one strong feeling--and that is my contempt for woman--the\
American woman. I\'92m not speaking about the masses. They don\'92t count.\
They never did. They never will. No one counts until he gets some\
education and some property. I suppose the women of the masses do as\
well as could be expected. But how about the women of the classes\
with education and property? Do you know why the world advances so\
slowly?--why the upper classes are always tumbling back and everything\
has to be begun all over again?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve a suspicion,\'94 said I. \'93Because the men are fools about the women.\'94\
\
\'93The sex question!\'94 cried Armitage. \'93That\'92s the only question worth\
agitating about. Until it\'92s settled--or begins to be settled--and\
settled right, it\'92s useless to attempt anything else. The men climb\
up. The women they take on their backs become a heavier and heavier\
burden--and down they both drop--and the children with them. Selfish,\
vain, extravagant mothers, crazy about snobbishness, bringing up their\
children in extravagance, ignorance and snobbishness--that\'92s America\
to-day!\'94\
\
\'93The men are fools about the women, and they let the women make fools\
of themselves.\'94\
\
\'93The men are fools--but not about the women,\'94 said Armitage. \'93How much\
time and thought for your family have you averaged daily in the last\
ten years?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve been busy,\'94 said I. \'93I\'92ve had to look out for the bread and\
butter, you know.\'94\
\
\'93Exactly!\'94 exclaimed he, in triumph. \'93You think you\'92re fond of your\
family. No doubt you are. But the bottom truth is you\'92re indifferent to\
your family. I can prove it in a sentence: You attend to anything you\
care about; and you haven\'92t attended to them.\'94\
\
I stared at him like a man dazzled by a sudden light--which, in fact, I\
was.\
\
\'93Guilty or not guilty?\'94 said he, laughing.\
\
\'93Guilty,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93The American man, too busy to be bothered, turns the American woman\
loose--gives her absolute freedom. And what is she? A child in\
education, a child in experience, a child in taste. He turns her loose,\
bids her do as she likes--and, up to the limit of his ability gives\
her all the money she wants. He prefers her a child. Her childishness\
rests his tired brain. And he doesn\'92t mind if she\'92s a little\
mischievous--that makes her more amusing.\'94\
\
\'93You are married--have children,\'94 said I, too serious to bother about\
tact. \'93How is it with you?\'94\
\
He laughed cynically. \'93Don\'92t speak of my family,\'94 said he. \'93I tried the\
other way. But I\'92ve given up--several years ago. What can _one_ do in a\
crazy crowd?\'94\
\
\'93Not much,\'94 confessed I, deeply depressed.\
\
\'93The women stampede each other,\'94 he went on. \'93Besides, no American\
woman--none that I know--has been brought up with education enough\
to enable her to make a life for herself, even when the man tries to\
help her. To like an occupation, to do anything at it, you\'92ve got\
to understand it. Being a husband and father is an occupation, the\
most important one in the world for a man. Being a wife and mother is\
an occupation--the most important one in the world for a woman. Are\
American men and women brought up to those occupations--trained in\
them--prepared for them? The most they know is a smatter at the pastime\
of lover and mistress--and they\'92re none too adept at that.\'94\
\
\'93I believe,\'94 said I, \'93that in my whole life I\'92ve never learned so much\
in so short a time.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92ll do you no good to have learned,\'94 rejoined Armitage. \'93It will\
only make you sad or bitter, according to your mood. Or, perhaps some\
day you may reach my plane of indifference--and be amused.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing is hopeless,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93The American woman is hopeless,\'94 said he. \'93Her vanity is\
triple-plated, copper-riveted. She\'92s hopeless so long as the American\
man will give her the money to buy flattery at home and abroad; for,\
so long as you can buy flattery, you never find out the truth about\
yourself. And the American man will give her the money as long as he\
can, because it buys him peace and freedom. He doesn\'92t want to be\
bothered with the American woman--except when he\'92s in a certain mood\
that doesn\'92t last long.\'94\
\
\'93There are exceptions,\'94 said I--not clear as to what I meant.\
\
\'93Yes--there are exceptions,\'94 said he. \'93There are American men who spend\
time with the American woman. And what does she do to them? Look at\
the poor asses!--neglecting their business, letting their minds go to\
seed. They don\'92t make her wise. She makes them foolish--as foolish as\
herself--and her children.\'94\
\
You may perhaps imagine into what a state this talk of Armitage\'92s threw\
me. He was talking generalities. But every word he spoke went straight\
home to me. He had torn the coverings from my inmost family life, had\
exposed its soul, naked and ugly, to my fascinated gaze.\
\
He finished dinner, lighted a cigarette--sat back watching me with a\
mysterious smile, half amused, wholly sympathetic, upon his handsome\
face, younger than his forty-five years--for he was considerably older\
than I. I was hardly more than barely conscious of that look of his, or\
of his presence. Suddenly I struck my fist with violence upon the arm\
of my chair. And I said:\
\
\'93I _will_ do something! It is _not_ hopeless!\'94\
\
He shook his head slowly, at the same time exhaling a cloud of smoke.\
\'93I tried, Godfrey,\'94 said he, \'93and I had a better chance of success\
than you could possibly have. For my wife had been brought up by a\
sensible father and mother in a sensible way, and she had been used to\
fashionable society all her life and, when I married her, seemed to\
have proved herself immune. A few years and--\'94 His cynical smile may\
not have been genuine. \'93She leads the simpletons. But you\'92ll see for\
yourself.\'94\
\
\'93When you know what to do, and feel as you do,\'94 said I, \'93why did you\
suggest our going into your society?\'94\
\
\'93It isn\'92t mine,\'94 laughed he. \'93It\'92s my wife\'92s. It doesn\'92t belong to the\
men. It belongs to the women.\'94\
\
\'93Into your wife\'92s society?\'94 persisted I.\
\
\'93Why did I suggest it? Because I wished to please you, and I know you\
like to please your wife. And she\'92s an American woman--therefore,\
society mad. She has her daughter at the Ryper joint, hasn\'92t she?\'94\
\
I sat morosely silent.\
\
\'93Oh, come now! Cheer up!\'94 cried he, with laughing irony. \'93After all,\
you can\'92t blame the American woman. She has no training for the career\
of woman. She has no training for any serious career. She\'92s got to do\
something, hasn\'92t she? Well, what is there open to her but the career\
of lady? That doesn\'92t call for brains or for education or for taste.\
The dressmaker and milliner supply the toilet. The architect and\
decorator and housekeeper and staff supply the grand background. Father\
or husband supplies the cash. A dip into a novel or book of culture\
essays supplies the gibble-gabble. A nice easy profession, is lady--and\
universally admired and envied. No, Loring, it isn\'92t fair to blame her.\'94\
\
We strolled down Fifth Avenue. After he had watched the stream of\
elegant carriages and automobiles, some of the too elegant automobiles\
having their interiors brightly lighted that the passersby might not\
fail to see the elaborate toilets of the occupants--after he had\
observed this procession of extravagance and vanity, with only an\
occasional derisive laugh or \'93Look there! Don\'92t miss that lady!\'94 he\
burst out again in his pleasantly ironical tone:\
\
\'93How fat the women are getting!--the automobile women! And how the\
candy shops are multiplying. Candy and automobiles!--and culture. Let\
us not forget culture.\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 said I grimly. \'93Let\'92s not forget the culture.\'94\
\
\'93I was telling my wife yesterday,\'94 said Armitage, \'93what culture is.\
It is talking in language that means nothing about things that mean\
less than nothing. But watch the ladies stream by, all got up in their\
gorgeous raiment and jewels. What have they ever done, what are they\
doing, that entitles them to so much more than their poor sisters\
scuffling along on the sidewalk here?\'94\
\
\'93They\'92ve talked and are talking about culture,\'94 said I. \'93And don\'92t\
forget charity.\'94\
\
\'93Ah--charity!\'94 cried he gayly. \'93Thank you. I see we understand each\
other.\'94 He linked his arm affectionately in mine. \'93Charity! It\'92s\
the other half of a lady\'92s occupation. Charity! Having no fancy for\
attending to her own business, she meddles in the business of the\
poor, tempting them to become liars and paupers. Your fine lady is a\
professional patronizer. She has no usefulness to contribute to the\
world. So, she patronizes--the arts with her culture--the poor with\
her charity, and the human race with her snobbishness.\'94\
\
He was so amused by his train of thought that he lapsed into silence\
the more fully to enjoy it; for, every thought has its shadings that\
cannot be expressed in words yet give the keenest enjoyment. When he\
spoke again, it was to repeat:\
\
\'93And what have these ladies done to entitle them to this luxury? Are\
they, perchance, being paid for giving to the world, and for inspiring,\
the noble sons and daughters who drive coaches and marry titles?\'94\
\
\'93But what do we men do? What do _I_ do--that entitles me to so much\
more than that chap perched on the hansom? I often think of it. Don\'92t\
you?\'94\
\
\'93Never,\'94 laughed Armitage. \'93I never claw my own sore spots. There\'92s\
no fun in that. Always claw the other fellow\'92s. There\'92s a laugh and\
distraction for your own troubles in seeing him wince.\'94\
\
\'93Is that why you\'92ve been clawing mine?\'94 said I.\
\
We were pausing before his big house, at the corner of the Avenue. \'93If\
I have been I didn\'92t know it,\'94 said he. He glanced up at his windows\
with a satirical smile. \'93This evening I\'92ve been breaking my rule and\
clawing at my own.\'94 He put out his hand. \'93Let the social business take\
its course,\'94 advised he with impressive friendliness. \'93You and I can\'92t\
make the world over. To fight against the inevitable merely increases\
everyone\'92s discomfort.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps you\'92re right,\'94 said I.\
\
I agreed with his conclusion that it was best to let things alone,\
though I reached that conclusion by a different route. I had in mind my\
forlorn hope of good results from a homeopathic treatment. I saw how\
impossible it was to undo the practically completed training of a grown\
girl. I appreciated the absurdity of an attempt radically to change\
Edna\'92s character--an absurdity as great as an attempt to make her a\
foot taller or to alter the color of her eyes. The one hope, it seemed\
to me--and I still think I was right--was that, when they had social\
position, when there should no longer be excuse for fretting lest some\
one were thinking them common, they might calm down toward some sort of\
sanity.\
\
Bear in mind, please, that at the time I did not have the situation,\
nor any idea of it, and of how to deal with it, definitely and clearly\
in mind. I was groping, was seeing dimly, was not even sure that I saw\
at all. I was like a thousand other busy American men who, after years\
of absorption in affairs, are abruptly and rudely awakened to the fact\
that there is something wrong at home where they had been flattering\
themselves everything was all right.\
\
The things Armitage had said occupied my mind, almost to the exclusion\
of my business. The longer I revolved them, the better I understood the\
situation at home. I could not but wonder what wretched catastrophe in\
his domestic life had made him so insultingly bitter against women. I\
felt that he was unfair to them; any judgment that condemned a class\
for possessing universal human weakness must be unfair. At the same\
time I believed he had excuse for being unfair--the excuse of a man\
whose domestic life is in ruins. I began to see toward the bottom of\
the woman question--the nature and the cause of the crisis through\
which women were passing.\
\
The modern world, as I had read history enough to know, had suddenly\
and completely revolutionized the conditions of life. The male sex,\
though poorly where at all equipped to meet the new conditions, still\
was compelled to meet them after a fashion. A river that for ages has\
moved quietly along in a deep bed, all in a night swells to many times\
its former size and plays havoc with the surrounding country. That\
was a fairly good figure for the new life science and machinery had\
suddenly forced upon the human race. The men living in the inundated\
region--where floods were unknown, where appliances, even ideas\
for combating them did not exist--the men, hastily, hysterically,\
incompetently, but with resolution and persistence, because forced by\
dire necessity, would proceed to deal with that vast new river. Just so\
were the men of our day dealing with the life of steam and electricity,\
of ancient landmarks of religion and morality swept away or shifted, of\
ancient industrial and social relations turned upside down and inside\
out. The men were coping with the situation after a fashion. But the\
women?\
\
These unfortunate creatures, faced with the new conditions, were in\
their greater ignorance and incapacity and helplessness, trying to\
live as if nothing had occurred!--as if the old order still existed.\
And the men, partly through ignorance, partly through preoccupation\
with the new order, partly through indifference and contempt veiled\
as consideration for the weaker sex, were encouraging them in their\
fatal folly. Was it strange that the women were deceived, remained\
unconscious of their peril? No, it was on the contrary inevitable. When\
men, though working away under and at the new conditions, still talked\
as if the old conditions prevailed, when preachers still preached that\
way, and orators still eulogized the thing that was dead and buried as\
if it lived and reigned, when in order to find out the change you had\
to disregard the speech, the professions, the confident assertions of\
all mankind and observe closely their actions only--when there was this\
universal unawareness and unpreparedness, how could the poor women be\
condemned?\
\
I could not but admit to myself that in his account of the doings of\
the women Armitage was only slightly if at all exaggerating. But with\
my more judicial temperament that had won me fortune and leadership\
while hardly more than a youth, I could not join him in damning the\
women for their folly and idleness and uselessness.\
\
So, the immediate result of Armitage\'92s talk was a gentler and\
thoroughly tolerant frame of mind toward my wife, both as to herself\
and as to what she had done to our daughter. After all, I had for wife\
only the typical woman--and a rarely sweet and charming example of\
the type. And my daughter was no worse, perhaps was better, than the\
average girl of her age and position. What did I think I had--or ought\
to have--in the way of wife and daughter, anyhow? What was this vague,\
sentimental dream of family life? If I were by some magic to find\
myself possessed of the sort of family I thought I wanted, wouldn\'92t I\
be more dissatisfied than at present? When I had a wife and a daughter\
who _looked_ so well and did nothing but what everyone around me\
regarded as right and proper, was I not unjust in my discontent?\
\
I had not seen Edna or Margot for several days before my talk with\
Bob Armitage. I did not see Edna for several days afterwards, though\
I dined at home every evening and did not go out after dinner. I was\
debating how to make overtures toward a reconciliation when she came\
into my study. She had an air of coldness and constraint--the air of\
the woman who is inflicting severe punishment upon an offending husband\
by withholding herself from him. She said:\
\
\'93Mrs. Robert Armitage has asked me to dine on Thursday evening.\'94\
\
I replied hesitatingly: \'93Thursday-- I\'92ve an engagement for Thursday--a\
dinner.\'94\
\
In her agitation she did not note that I had not finished. Dropping her\
coldness, she flashed out fiercely:\
\
\'93We\'92ve simply _got_ to accept! It\'92s our chance. We may not have it\
again. It\'92s what I\'92ve been waiting for ever since we moved to this\
house. And I can\'92t go alone. Oh, how selfish you are! You never think\
of anything but your own comfort. And you can\'92t or won\'92t realize any of\
the higher things of life for which I\'92m striving. It is too horrible!\'94\
\
If any male reader of this story has known a woman who was, up to a\
certain time, always able to rouse a strong emotion in him--of love\
or anger, of pleasure or pain--a woman toward whom he could not be\
lukewarm, and if that reader can recall the day on which he faced that\
woman in a situation of stress and found himself calm and patient and\
kind toward her----\
\
I was surprised to find that Edna was not moving me. Her loveliness\
did not stir a single tiny flame of passion. Her abuse did not excite\
resentment or dread. \'93Just a moment, my dear,\'94 said I with the\
tranquillity of a judge. \'93I was trying to say that I would break my\
engagement.\'94\
\
I saw that she did not believe me but imagined her outburst had\
terrified and cowed me into submission. How dispassionately I observed\
and judged!\
\
\'93Accept, if you wish,\'94 I went on. \'93I like Armitage. We\'92ve been friends\
for years.\'94\
\
\'93Why didn\'92t you tell me so?\'94 demanded she. \'93Why have you been plotting\
against me all this time?\'94\
\
\'93You forbade me to speak of business,\'94 said I. \'93So I have never spoken\
of my business friends.\'94\
\
Her anger against me was almost beyond control. If she had been a lady\
born, if she had not had a past to live down, a childhood of vulgar\
surroundings and actions, she would have given way and abused like a\
fish wife. A lady born dares excesses of passion that a made lady,\
with her deep reverence for the ladylike, would shrink from. She said\
through clinched teeth:\
\
\'93I find out that Mrs. Armitage, the leader of the younger set, the\
most fashionable woman in New York, has been eager to know me for a\
long time. And _you_ have been preventing it!\'94\
\
\'93How?\'94 said I, amused, but not showing it.\
\
\'93She called here the other day. She was as friendly as could be. We\
became friends at once. She said that for months she had been at her\
husband to get her leave to call on me, but that he and you, between\
you, had neglected to arrange it.\'94\
\
I saw how this notion of the matter delighted her, and that the truth\
would enrage her, would make her dislike me more than ever. So, I held\
my peace and thought, for the first time, I believe, how tiresome a\
woman without a sense of humor could become--how tryingly tiresome.\
\
\'93She and I are going to do a lot of things together,\'94 continued Edna in\
the same intense humorless way. \'93I always knew that if I got a chance\
to talk with one of those women who could appreciate me, I\'92d have no\
further trouble. I knew I was wasting time on those religious fakirs\
and frumps, but I was always hoping that through them I\'92d somehow meet\
a woman of my own sort. Now I\'92ve met her, and something tells me I\'92ll\
have no further trouble.\'94\
\
\'93Probably you\'92re right,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93How it infuriates me,\'94 she went on, \'93to think I\'92d have been spared\
all the humiliations and heartaches I\'92ve suffered, if you had used\
your influence with Robert Armitage months--years ago. But no--you\
don\'92t want me to get on. You wanted to stick in the mud. So I had to\
suffer--and Margot, too.\'94\
\
\'93Well, it\'92s all right now,\'94 said I, probably as indifferently as I\
felt. Why had God seen fit to create women without the sense of humor?\
Perhaps to save men from falling altogether under their rule.\
\
\'93The sufferings of that poor child!\'94 cried Edna. \'93And the very day\
after Mrs. Armitage came, Gracie Fortescue asked her to a party, and\
all the girls have taken her up. Gracie Fortescue is a niece of Hilda\
Armitage. Her brother married a Fortescue.\'94\
\
\'93Really?\'94 said I. \'93And Margot is happy?\'94\
\
\'93No thanks to you,\'94 retorted Edna sourly.\
\
\'93Well, plunge in, my dear,\'94 said I, beginning to examine the papers\
before me on the desk. \'93Only--spare me as much as possible. I need all\
my time and strength for my work.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92ll have to go with me to dinners, and to the opera\
occasionally. I can\'92t do this thing altogether alone.\'94\
\
\'93Say I\'92m an invalid. Say I\'92m away. They don\'92t want me, anyhow. Armitage\
doesn\'92t go with his wife.\'94\
\
\'93But that\'92s different,\'94 cried she in a fever. \'93_She_ has always had\
social position. It doesn\'92t matter if people do talk scandal about her.\
_I_ can\'92t afford to cause gossip.\'94\
\
\'93Why should they gossip? But no matter. I don\'92t want to worry with\
that--that higher life, let us call it. Or to be worried with it. Do\
the best you can for me. I\'92m a man\'92s man--always have been--always\
shall be. If you\'92ve got to have a man to take you about, dig up one\
somewhere. I\'92m willing to pay him well.\'94\
\
\'93Always money!\'94 exclaimed she in deep disgust.\
\
I laughed. \'93Not a bad thing, money,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It would never have got me Mrs. Armitage\'92s friendship,\'94 said she\
loftily.\
\
\'93You think so?\'94 said I amiably. \'93All right, if it pleases you.\
But--take my advice, my dear--enjoy yourself to the limit with\
highfaluting _talk_ about the worthlessness of money and that sort\
of rot. But don\'92t for a minute lose your point of view and convince\
yourself.\'94\
\
\'93Thank God I\'92ve got a vein of refinement, of idealism in my nature,\'94\
said Edna. \'93I wouldn\'92t have as sordid an opinion of human nature as you\
have for anything in the world.\'94\
\
\'93You can afford not to have it, my dear,\'94 said I. \'93So long as I know\
the truth, and so make the necessary money to keep us going, you are\
free to indulge your lovely delusions. Have your beautiful, unmercenary\
friendship with Mrs. Armitage and the other ladies. I\'92ll continue\
to make it financially worth their husbands\'92 while to encourage the\
friendships.\'94\
\
\'93I thought so!\'94 cried she. \'93You believe Mrs. Armitage has taken me up\
for business reasons.\'94\
\
\'93If you had been some poor woman--\'94 I began mildly.\
\
\'93Don\'92t be absurd!\'94 cried my wife. \'93How could there be an equal and\
true friendship between Mrs. Armitage and a woman with none of the\
surroundings of a lady, and with no means of gratifying the tastes\
of a lady? But that doesn\'92t mean that Mrs. Armitage is a low, sordid\
woman. She has a beautiful nature. Money is merely the background of\
high society. It simply gives ladies and gentlemen the opportunity\
to set the standards of dress and manners and taste. And of course\
they\'92re careful whom they associate with. Who wants to be annoyed\
by adventurers and climbers and all sorts of dreadful mercenary,\
self-seeking people?\'94\
\
\'93Who, indeed?\'94 said I.\
\
It gently appealed to my sense of the ridiculous, to see my wife thus\
changed in a twinkling into a defender and exponent of fashionable\
society. It was so deliciously feminine, as fantastically humorless,\
her sincere belief in the poppycock she was reeling off--the twaddle\
with which Mrs. Armitage had doubtless stuffed her. The sordidness,\
the vulgarity, the meanness, the petty cruelty, the snobbishness of\
fashionable people--all forgotten in a moment, hastily covered deep\
with the gilt and the tinsel of hypocritical virtues. What an amusing\
ass the human animal is! How stupidly unconscious of its own motives!\
How eagerly it attributes to itself all kinds of high motives for the\
ordinary, or scrubby, or downright mean actions--and attributes the\
same motives to its fellow asses, to make its own pretenses the more\
plausible! An amusing ass--but it would be more amusing if it were not\
so monotonously solemn, but laughed at itself occasionally.\
\
However----\
\
The atmosphere of our home now steadily improved. The servants\
began to respect us, where they had despised and had scarcely\
troubled themselves to conceal their contempt. The cook sent up\
more attractive--though I fear even less digestible--dishes. The\
butler addressed me with a gratifying servility. The maids developed\
unexpected talents, showing acquaintance with the needs and customs\
of a fashionable household. The housekeeper\'92s soul dropped from its\
theretofore insolently erect posture to all fours, and she attended\
to her duties. Edna became sweet and gracious. Margot grew merry and\
affectionate. All the result of Mrs. Armitage. We had been pariahs; we\
were of the elect.\
\
I saw and felt the change distinctly at the time. But it is only in\
retrospect that I take the full measure--get its full humor--and pathos.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
That Armitage dinner was _the_ event of Edna\'92s life. She had been born;\
she had married; she had given birth--all memorable and important\
occurrences. But this formal d\'e9but in fashionable society topped\
them as the peak tops the foothills. Having seen her quivering and\
hysterical excitement when we were leaving the house, I feared a\
breakdown. I marveled at her apparent calmness and ease as we entered\
the dining room of the Armitages. Never had she looked so well. If Mrs.\
Armitage had not been a self-satisfied beauty of the dark type she\
might have demolished Edna\'92s dream in its very realizing. But no doubt\
Edna, the shrewd, had duly measured Hilda Armitage and had discovered\
that it was safe to make her proud of the woman she had taken under\
protection and patronage.\
\
There were but a dozen people in all at the dinner. It did not seem\
to be much of an affair. The drawing-room was plain--nothing gaudy,\
nothing costly looking. Our own dining room was much grander--to\
our then uneducated taste. The guests were--just people--simple,\
good-natured mortals, perfectly at their ease and putting us at our\
ease. You would have wondered, after five minutes of that company,\
how anyone could possibly find any difficulty in getting intimately\
acquainted with them. But, as Edna knew at a glance, she and I were in\
the midst of the innermost and smallest circle of the many circles one\
within another that make up New York fashionable society. If on the\
recommendation of the Armitages we should have the good fortune to be\
accepted by that circle of circles, that circle within the circles,\
there would be nothing of a social nature left for us to conquer in New\
York. I was ignorant of all this at the time; had I known, I imagine\
I should have remained tranquil. But Edna knew at a glance; she had\
been studying these matters for years. It shows what force of character\
she had that she conducted herself as if it were the most ordinary and\
familiar occasion of her life. She had always said, even away back in\
the days of the grand forty-dollars-a-month flat in Passaic, that she\
belonged at the social top. She was undoubtedly right. The way she\
acted when she arrived there proved it.\
\
You do not often have the chance, gentle reader, to get so well\
acquainted with any human being as I have enabled you to get with Edna.\
Probably you do not even know yourself so well. Therefore I suspect\
that you have a wholly false notion of her--think her in every way much\
worse relatively than she was. Through your novels and through the\
reports your dim eyes bring to your narrow and shallow mind, you have\
acquired certain habits of judging your fellow beings.\
\
You attach inflated importance to their unimportant surface\
qualities--physical appearance, pleasant voice and manner--and to their\
amiable little hypocrisies of apparent sweetness and generosity and\
friendliness. You do not see the real person--the human being. You,\
being by training a hypocrite and a believer in hypocrisies, scorn\
human beings. Now I prefer them to the sort of people with whom you\
and your false literature populate the world. In making you acquainted\
with Edna--and the others in my story--I have not introduced you to bad\
people, monsters, but to real beings of usual types, probably on the\
whole superior to your smug self in all the good qualities. Had you\
seen Edna in the Armitage house that evening you would have thought her\
as incapable of calculation and snobbishness as--well, as any of the\
others in that company whose whole lives were made up of calculation\
and snobbishness. She--and they--looked so refined and elevated.\
She--and they--talked so high-mindedly. I, who knew almost nothing at\
that time except business, was listener rather than talker; and you may\
be sure such a man as I, having such ignorance as mine to cover up, had\
in years of practice become somewhat adept in that saving art for the\
intelligent ignorant. But Edna----\
\
She, the most expert of smatterers, fairly shone. With her beauty and\
vivacity, her eloquent eyes and dazzling smile, and exquisite bare\
shoulders, to aid her, she created an impression of brilliancy.\
\
\'93You had a good time?\'94 said I, when we were in the motor for the home\
journey.\
\
\'93I never had as good a time in my life,\'94 she exclaimed, her voice\
tremulous with ecstasy. \'93Did I look well?\'94\
\
\'93Never so well,\'94 said I. \'93And you made a hit.\'94\
\
\'93I was careful to cultivate the women,\'94 said she. \'93I\'92ve got to get the\
women.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve got them,\'94 I declared sincerely.\
\
\'93You\'92re sure I didn\'92t make some of them jealous? Did you see any signs?\'94\
\
\'93They liked you,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I had to play my cards well,\'94 pursued she. \'93It was a difficult\
position. I was far and away the best looking woman there, with the\
possible exception of Mrs. Armitage. Did you hear her call me Edna?\'94\
\
\'93You and Mrs. Armitage look well together. You are of about the same\
figure, and the contrast of coloring is very good.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s why we took to each other so quickly. Each of us sets off the\
other.\'94\
\
\'93How did you like Armitage?\'94 I asked.\
\
\'93Oh, well enough,\'94 said she indifferently. \'93I hardly noticed him--or\
the other men. I had my game to play. The men don\'92t count in the social\
game. It\'92s the women. I shall be nervous until I find out whether I\
really got them. They are such cats!--so mean and sly and jealous. I\
_detest_ women!\'94\
\
\'93I prefer men, myself,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Men!\'94 She laughed scornfully. \'93I think men are intolerable--American\
men. They say foreigners are better. But American men--they know\
nothing but dull business or politics. They have no breadth--no\
idealism. The women are far superior to the men.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93No doubt you women are too good for us,\'94 said I carelessly.\
\'93We\'92re grateful that you don\'92t scorn us too much even to accept our\
money.\'94\
\
\'93How coarse that is! Don\'92t spoil the happiest evening of my life.\'94\
\
We were at home, so she could escape from me. And I, for my part, was\
as glad to be quit of her society as she could possibly have been to\
get rid of me. I was beginning to realize that her conversation bored\
me, that it had always bored me, that it was her sex and only her sex\
that interested me. And latterly even this had lost its charm. Why?\
\
I have observed--and perhaps you have observed it, too--that people\
of wealth and position, unless they have very striking individuality\
indeed, are usually utterly devoid of charm. It is difficult to become\
interested in them, to establish any sort of sympathetic current.\
And you will notice that fashionable functions are dull, essentially\
dull; that the animation is artificial, is supplied from without by an\
orchestra or entertainers, and fails to infect the company. It was long\
before I discovered the explanation for this. I at first thought it was\
the stupidity that comes from a surfeit of the luxuries and pleasures.\
But I am now convinced that this familiar explanation is not the true\
one; that the true one is the excessive, the really preposterous\
self-centeredness of people of rank and wealth. From waking until\
sleeping they are surrounded by hirelings and sycophants who think\
and talk only of them. Thus the rich man or woman gets into the habit\
of concentrating upon self. Now the essence of charm is giving--giving\
oneself out in sympathetic interest in one\'92s fellows. How can people,\
all whose faculties are trained to work in upon themselves--how can\
they have charm? An egotist, one who _talks_ only of himself, may have\
charm because he gives you the impression that he is trying to please\
you, that he thinks you so important that he wishes you to be sensible\
of his importance. But the egotist who, whatever he _talks_, _thinks_\
only of himself--he is not only dull and bored but also a diffuser\
of dullness and boredom. And that is how their servants and their\
sycophants make the rich and the fashionable so dreary.\
\
I imagine some such effect as this was being produced upon my wife\
by her surroundings of luxury. I think that may account for her long\
decreasing charm for me. At any rate, soon after she was well launched\
on her Elysian sea of fashion--that is to say, soon after she ceased to\
have any check of social seeking to restrain her from centering all her\
thoughts and actions upon herself, she lost the last bit of her charm\
for me. She became radiantly beautiful. Her face took on a serene and\
refinedly assured expression that made her extravagantly admired on\
every hand. She became gracious to me and almost as sweet as she had\
been before we moved to New York. She even let me see that, if I so\
desired, she would condescend to be on terms of wifely affection with\
me again. But I did not so desire. I liked her. I admired her energy,\
her toilets, and, quite impersonally, her aristocratic beauty. But\
I was content to be a bachelor, and I was grateful when she began to\
relieve me of the tediousness of going about in her train.\
\
My substitute was an architect, Leon MacIlvane by name--a handsome\
young fellow of about my wife\'92s age, though he thought her much\
younger, despite Margot\'92s age and appearance. With his poetic dark eyes\
and classic features, and rich, deep voice, MacIlvane had long been\
a favorite with the young married women of the Armitage set. He was\
indeed a valuable asset. The rich unmarried men were not especially\
interesting; also, they were needed by the marriageable girls.\
MacIlvane, not a marrying man and never making any mother uneasy by so\
much as an interested glance at a daughter intended for a rich husband,\
devoted himself to married women.\
\
\'93I do not care for girls,\'94 he said to me. \'93They are too colorless.\'94\
\
\'93Why bother with women at all?\'94 said I. \'93Aren\'92t they all colorless?\
What do they know about life? What experience have they had?\'94\
\
\'93An intelligent woman\'92s mind is the complement of an intelligent man\'92s\
mind,\'94 said he, as if this trite old fallacy were a brilliant discovery\
of his own making. \'93Women stimulate me, give me ideas.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I see,\'94 said I practically. \'93Business. Yes, an architect does deal\
chiefly with the women.\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t mean that,\'94 said he, showing as much anger as he dared show\
the husband of the woman to whom he had attached himself.\
\
\'93Where\'92s the harm in it?\'94 said I encouragingly. \'93You\'92ve got to make a\
living--haven\'92t you? It\'92s good sense for a business man to cultivate\
his customers.\'94\
\
He, the poseur and the small man, hated this plain truthful way of\
dealing with his profession. Like all chaps of that kidney he thought\
only of himself and of appearances, and sought to degrade a noble\
profession to the base uses of his vanity. In fact, he had begun with\
my wife because of the orders he hoped to get--for, he suspected\
that once she looked about her in the fashionable world from the new\
viewpoint of a fashionable person, she would want changes in her house\
to make it less vividly grand. He believed she would let Hilda Armitage\
educate her; and Hilda, unlike most of her friends, liked the quiet\
kinds of ostentation and costliness. And he guessed correctly. He was\
well paid for undertaking to replace me as escort--so far as I could\
be replaced without causing scandal--and, thank heaven, that was very\
far in the New York of busy and bored husbands, detesting the gaudy\
gaddings their wives loved.\
\
Soon he was serving my wife for other reasons than pay. I saw something\
of him from time to time, and I presently began to note a change in his\
manner toward me--a formal politeness, an exaggeration of courtesy. I\
spoke to Armitage about it. Armitage and I had become the most intimate\
of friends--knocked about together in the evenings, were more closely\
associated than ever in business.\
\
\'93Bob,\'94 said I to Armitage, \'93what ails that ass, MacIlvane? He treats\
me as if he were in love with my wife.\'94\
\
Armitage laughed. \'93That\'92s it,\'94 said he. \'93My wife\'92s spaniel, Courtleigh,\
who writes poetry, treats me the same way. Get any anonymous letters\
yet?\'94\
\
\'93Two,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Servants,\'94 said he. \'93I suppose you burnt them? You didn\'92t show them to\
your wife?\'94\
\
\'93Heavens, no,\'94 replied I. \'93Why unsettle her? Why upset a pleasant\
arrangement? My wife finds MacIlvane useful. I find him invaluable. He\
saves me hours of time. He spares me hours of boredom.\'94\
\
\'93My feeling about Courtleigh,\'94 said Armitage. \'93And both those chaps are\
comfortably trustworthy.\'94\
\
\'93I hadn\'92t thought of MacIlvane in that way,\'94 said I. \'93I know my\
wife--and that\'92s enough.\'94\
\
Armitage reflected with an amused smile on his face. Finally, he\
said: \'93I don\'92t suppose there ever were since the world began so\
thoroughly trustworthy women as these American women of the fashionable\
crowd--those that have very rich husbands--and only those, of course,\
are really fashionable. They may flirt a little, but never anything\
serious--never anything that\'92d give their husbands an excuse for\
throwing them out--and lose them their big houses and big incomes and\
social leadership.\'94\
\
I had not thought of these aspects of the matter. I based my feeling of\
security solely on my knowledge of my wife\'92s intense self-absorption.\
All the springs of sentiment--except the shallow spring of highfaluting\
talk--had dried up in her. She would listen to MacIlvane\'92s flatteries\
as long as he cared to pour them out. But if he ever tried to get her\
to think of _him_, she would feel outraged.\
\
\'93I suppose,\'94 pursued Armitage, \'93we\'92d be tremendously amused if we\
could overhear those chaps talking to our wives about us. They don\'92t\
dare presume to the extent of mentioning our names. But they hand\
out generalities of roasting--how stupid most American men are, how\
superior the women are, what a tragic condescension for a wonderful\
American woman to have to live with a man who couldn\'92t appreciate her.\'94\
\
I nodded and laughed.\
\
\'93Nothing a woman loves so much--an American woman with a little\
miseducation befogging her mind and fooling her as to its limited\
extent--nothing she so dearly loves as to hear that she has a\
great intellect and a great soul, complex, mysterious, beyond the\
comprehension of the vulgar male clods about her. That\'92s why they\
like foreigners. You ought to watch those foreign chaps flatter our\
women--make perfect fools of them.\'94\
\
But I had no desire to watch women in any circumstances. I had no\
active resentment against them as had Armitage. I simply wished to\
be let alone, to be free to pursue my ambitions and my ideas of\
self-development. I had ceased to feel about Margot. I was merely glad\
she was not a boy; for I felt that if she were a boy, I should have\
to assert myself and do some drastic and disagreeable--and almost\
certainly disastrous--disciplining in my family.\
\
About a year and a half after my wife achieved her ambition, I began to\
feel that she was spiritually bearing down upon me in pursuance of some\
new secret plan.\
\
During the year and a half she had been playing the fashionable social\
game with the strenuous enthusiasm which only a woman--I had almost\
said only an American woman--seems able to inject into the pursuit\
of objects that are of no consequences whatsoever. And, in spite of\
the useful MacIlvane I had been compelled to assist her far more than\
was to my liking. I went about enough to get a thorough insight into\
fashionableness--and a profound distaste for it. Of the many phases,\
ludicrous, repellent, despicable, pitiful, there was one that made a\
deep impression upon me. It amazed me to find that the \'93best\'94 class\
of people was, if possible, more vulgarly snobbish than the class\
from which I had come--even than the \'93Brooklyn bounders.\'94 I could\
not comprehend--I cannot comprehend--how those who have had the best\
opportunities are no more intelligent, no broader of mind than those\
who have had no opportunities at all. The ignorance, the narrowness of\
the men and women of the comfortable classes!--the laziness of their\
minds!--the shallow cant about literature, art and the like! Really,\
intelligence, activity of mind, seems confined to the few who are\
pushing upward; and the masses of mankind in all classes seem contented\
each class with its own peculiar wallow of ignorance.\
\
But to Edna\'92s secret plan. If you are a married man you will at once\
understand what I mean when I speak of having a vague sensation of\
being borne down upon. She said nothing; she did nothing. But I knew\
she was making ready to ask something to which she believed she could\
get my consent only by the use of all her tact and skill and charm--for\
she did not know her charms had ceased to charm, but thought them more\
potent than ever. I waited with patience and composure; and in due time\
she began cautious open approaches.\
\
\'93Margot is almost ready to come out,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Money?\'94 said I, smiling.\
\
She rebuked this coarseness amiably. \'93_Everybody_ isn\'92t _always_\
thinking of money, dear,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93But why talk to _me_ about anything else? That\'92s my only department in\
the family.\'94\
\
She deigned a smile for my pleasantry, then went on in her usual\
serious way: \'93I wish to consult you about her education.\'94\
\
\'93Oh--finish as you\'92ve begun,\'94 said I. \'93I suppose it\'92s the best that can\
be done for a girl.\'94\
\
\'93But I can\'92t find what I want,\'94 said she, with an expression of sweet\
maternal solicitude. \'93I\'92ve always been determined Margot should have\
the best education any girl in the whole world could get.\'94\
\
\'93Go ahead,\'94 said I. \'93See that she gets it.\'94\
\
\'93She shall have the perfect equipment of a lady--of a woman of the\
world,\'94 continued Edna, with growing enthusiasm. \'93She has the beauty to\
set it off--and we can afford to give it to her. I am willing to make\
any sacrifices that may be necessary.\'94\
\
I pricked up my ears. I always do when anyone, male or female, uses\
that word sacrifice. I know a piece of selfishness is coming.\
\
\'93As I was saying,\'94 pursued Edna, with the serene look of the\
self-confident woman who is taking her husband in firm, strong hands,\
\'93I have been unable to find what I want for her. Mrs. Armitage tells me\
I\'92ll not find it except in Paris.\'94\
\
\'93Well--why not go to Paris?\'94 said I.\
\
Did you ever lift an empty box that you thought full and heavy? My wife\
looked as if she had just done that exceedingly uncomfortable thing.\
\'93But I don\'92t see-- I--I-- It would be a terrible sacrifice to have to\
go and live in Paris,\'94 stammered she.\
\
\'93Then don\'92t do it,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But I must think of Margot!\'94 exclaimed she hastily.\
\
\'93Oh, Margot seems to be stepping along all right. She\'92ll never miss\
what she doesn\'92t know about.\'94\
\
\'93But you must realize, dear, what an education she\'92d get in Paris. And\
I suppose it would do me good, too. It\'92s a shame that I don\'92t speak\
French. Everyone except me speaks it. They all had French governesses\
when they were children.\'94\
\
\'93Some of them had--and some hadn\'92t,\'94 said I. \'93Armitage has told me\
things about your friends that make me suspect they\'92re doing fully as\
much bluffing as we are.\'94\
\
She winced, and sighed the sigh of the lady patient with a low husband.\
\'93Then you think I ought to go?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93I think you ought to do as you like,\'94 said I. \'93I always have thought\
so. I always shall.\'94\
\
\'93And,\'94 continued she absently, \'93the society over there must be\
charming. Really, I need the education as much as Margot does. I do\
surprisingly well, considering what my early opportunities were.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve never once heard you give yourself away,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92m not that stupid,\'94 replied she. \'93But--a while in France--on the\
Continent--and in England perhaps----\'94\
\
\'93How long would you be gone?\'94 interrupted I, to show her that all this\
beating round Robin\'92s barn was superfluous.\
\
She gave me a coquettish look: \'93How long could you spare me?\'94\
\
\'93I can\'92t tell till I\'92ve tried,\'94 said I, with a gallant smile--but with\
no move toward her. You women who would be wise, distrust the gallantry\
that is content with speech and look.\
\
\'93You understand,\'94 pursued she, \'93if I started this thing I\'92d put it\
through--no matter how much I missed you or how homesick I was over\
there.\'94\
\
\'93You always do put things through,\'94 said I admiringly. \'93When have you\
planned to start?\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t planned at all, as yet,\'94 replied she--and I saw she thought\
I had set a trap for her, and was delighted with herself for having\
dodged it. Certainly never was there a husband with whom indirection\
was more unnecessary. Yet she would not realize this, partly because\
she had never bothered to discover what manner of man I was, partly\
because she had one of those natures that move only by secrecy and\
indirection.\
\
\'93Do you expect me to go over with you?\'94 inquired I.\
\
\'93I only wish you would!\'94 exclaimed she, but I distrusted her enthusiasm.\
\
\'93Couldn\'92t MacIlvane take you over and settle you?\'94\
\
Her face clouded. Her lip curled slightly. \'93I don\'92t like him as I did,\'94\
said she. \'93I\'92ve found out he\'92s ridiculously vain and egotistical.\'94\
\
I laughed outright.\
\
\'93What is it?\'94 inquired she, elevating her eyebrows. She had always\
disapproved my sense of humor.\
\
\'93So he\'92s been making love to you--eh?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93No, indeed!\'94 cried she, bridling haughtily. \'93He\'92d not dare. But I saw\
he was beginning to presume in that direction, and I checked him.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, he\'92s harmless,\'94 said I. \'93Keep friendly with him. He\'92d be the very\
person to settle you in Paris. He lived there several years.\'94\
\
\'93It would cause scandal,\'94 said she. \'93If you can\'92t go, I can do well\
enough alone, I\'92m sure.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92d only be in the way,\'94 said I. \'93Let me know when you wish to go, and\
I\'92ll try to arrange it. But I can\'92t get away for at least three months.\'94\
\
\'93That would be too late,\'94 said she. \'93Margot must be started at once.\
She hasn\'92t any too much time before her coming out. Also, Mrs. Armitage\
is sailing in two weeks, and she would be a great help.\'94\
\
\'93Then you have decided to sail in two weeks?\'94 said I, adding before\
she had time to get beyond a gathering frown of protest, \'93That suits\
me. I\'92ll make my own plans accordingly.\'94\
\
And in two weeks they sailed, I watching the big ship creep out of dock\
and drop slowly down the river. Armitage and I drove away from the pier\
together. We were in such high spirits that we had champagne with our\
lunch.\
\
\
\
\
VI\
\
\
Armitage and I were together every day. He attracted me for the\
usual reason of congeniality, and also because he was giving me a\
liberal education. I have never cared for books or, with two or three\
exceptions, for book men. About both there is for me an atmosphere of\
staleness, of tedium. I prefer to get what is in the few worth-while\
books through the medium of some clear and original mind--such a mind\
as Armitage had. He ought to have been a great man. No, he was a great\
man; what I mean to say is that his talents ought to have won his\
greatness recognition. He did not lack capacity or energy; he showed a\
high degree of both in the management and increase of his fortune. He\
lacked that species of vanity, I guess it is, which spurs a man to make\
himself conspicuous. Also he had a kind of laziness, and chose to be\
active only in the way that was easiest and most agreeable for him--the\
making of money.\
\
His father had been rich, and his grandfather; his great grandfather\
had been one of the richest men in Revolutionary times. His father\
was regarded as a crank because he had imagination, and therefore\
despised the conventional ideas of his own generation; to be regarded\
as thoroughly sane and sensible, you must be careful to be neither,\
but to pattern yourself painstakingly upon the particular form\
of feeble-mindedness and conventional silliness current in your\
time. Armitage\'92s father resolved that his son should not have his\
individuality clipped and moulded and patterned by college and caste\
into the familiar type of upper-class man. So Armitage went to public\
school, graduated from it into a factory, then into an office, himself\
earned the money to carry out the ambitions for study and travel with\
which his father had inspired him.\
\
I think there was nothing worth the knowing about which Armitage had\
not accurate essential information--books, plays, pictures, music,\
literature, history, economics, science, medicine, law, finance. He\
was a good shot and a good horseman, could run an automobile, take it\
to pieces, put it together again. He was a practical mechanic and a\
practical railroad man. He had a successful model farm. \'93It doesn\'92t\
take long to learn the essentials about anything,\'94 said he, \'93if you\
will only put your whole mind on it and not let up till you\'92ve got what\
you want. And the trouble with most people--why, they are narrow and\
ignorant and incompetent--it isn\'92t lack of mind, but lack of interest.\
They have no curiosity.\'94 Nor was my friend Armitage a smatterer. He\
didn\'92t try to _do_ everything; he contented himself with knowledge, and\
_did_ only one thing--made money out of railroads.\
\
When he saw that I really wished to be educated, he amused himself by\
educating me. Not in a formal way, of course; but simply talking along,\
about whatever happened to come up. I have never known a man to get\
anywhere, who did not have an excellent memory. Lack of memory--which\
means lack of the habit and power of giving attention--is the cause of\
more failures than all other defects put together. If you don\'92t believe\
it, test the failures you know; perhaps you might even test your own\
not too successful self. I had an unusual memory; and I don\'92t think\
Armitage or anyone ever told me anything worth knowing that I did not\
stick to it and keep it where I could use it instantly.\
\
Several months after his wife and mine departed, we were walking in the\
park one afternoon--the usual tramp round the upper reservoir to reduce\
or to keep in condition. He said in the most casual way:\
\
\'93My wife is coming next week, and will get her divorce at once.\'94\
\
Taking my cue from his manner I showed even less surprise then I felt.\
\'93This is the first I\'92ve heard of it,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Really?\'94 said he carelessly. \'93Everyone knows.\'94 He laughed to himself.\
\'93She is to marry Lord Blankenship--the Earl of Blankenship.\'94\
\
\'93And the children?\'94 said I.\
\
He shrugged his shoulders. \'93I don\'92t know. Her people will look\
after them. She has spoiled them beyond repair. I have no interest\
in them--nor they in me.\'94 After a little tramping in silence, he\
halted and rested his hands on the railing and looked away across the\
lakelike reservoir, its surface tossed up into white caps by the\
wind. \'93I loved her when we were married,\'94 said he. \'93That caused all\
the mischief. I let her do as she pleased. She was a fine girl--good\
family but poor. She pretended to be in sympathy with my ideas.\'94 His\
lip curled in good-humored contempt. \'93I believed in her enthusiasm.\
My father--wonderfully sane old man--warned me she was only after our\
money, but I wouldn\'92t listen. Tried to quarrel with him. He wouldn\'92t\
have it--gave me my way. It\'92s not strange I believed in her. She looked\
all that\'92s high-minded--and delicate--and what they call aristocratic.\
Well, it _is_ aristocratic--the reality of aristocracy.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps she was sincere,\'94 said I, out of the depths of my own\
experience, \'93perhaps she honestly imagined she liked and wanted the\
sort of life you pictured. We are all hypocrites, but most of us are\
unconscious hypocrites.\'94\
\
\'93No doubt she did deceive herself--in part at least,\'94 he admitted. \'93For\
a year or so after our marriage she kept up the bluff. I didn\'92t catch\
on--didn\'92t find her out--until we began to differ about bringing up the\
children. Even then, I loved her so that I let her have her way until\
it was too late.\'94\
\
\'93But,\'94 said I, \'93don\'92t you owe it to them to----\'94\
\
He interrupted with an impatient, \'93Didn\'92t I try? But it was hopeless.\
To succeed in this day, I\'92d have had to take the children away off\
into the woods, with the chances that even there the servants I\'92d\
be compelled to have would spoil them--would keep them reminded of\
the rotten snobbishness they\'92ve been taught.\'94 He laughed at me with\
mocking irony. \'93You have a daughter,\'94 said he. \'93What about her?\'94\
\
\'93I was thinking of your boy,\'94 said I.\
\
He frowned and looked away. After a long pause--\'93Hopeless--hopeless,\'94\
said he. \'93Believe me--hopeless. The boy is like her. No, I\'92ll have to\
begin all over again.\'94\
\
I gave an inquiring look.\
\
\'93Marry again,\'94 explained he. \'93Another sort of woman, and keep her\
and her children away from this world of ours. I\'92d like to try the\
experiment. But--\'94 He laughed apologetically. \'93I\'92m afraid I love\
the city and its amusements too well. I\'92m not as determined nor as\
ardent as I once was. What does it matter, anyway? So long as we are\
comfortable and well amused, why should we bother?\'94 After a silence,\
\'93Another mistake I made--the initial mistake--was in giving her a\
fortune. She is almost as well fixed as I am. Don\'92t make that mistake,\
Godfrey.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve already done it,\'94 said I. \'93And I shall never be sorry that I\
did. I gave my wife the first large sum I made, and I\'92ve added to it\
from time to time. I wanted her and Margot to be safe, no matter what\
happened to me.\'94\
\
\'93A mistake,\'94 he said. \'93A sad mistake. I know how you felt. I felt the\
same way. But there\'92s something worse than the more or less sentimental\
aversion to being loved and considered merely for the money they can\
get out of you and can\'92t get without you.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing worse,\'94 I declared.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 he replied. \'93It\'92s worse to give a foolish woman the power to\
make a fool of herself, of her children, and of you.\'94\
\
\'93That is bad, I\'92ll admit,\'94 said I. \'93But the other is worse--at least to\
me.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92d refuse to make a child behave itself, through the selfish fear\
that it would hate you for doing so.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93You know my weakness, I see,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93There\'92s the foolish American husband and father. No wonder all the\
classes that ought to be leaders in development and civilization are\
leaders only in luxury and folly.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, let them have a good time--what they call a good time,\'94 said I.\
\'93As you said a moment ago, it doesn\'92t matter.\'94\
\
\'93If it only were a good time--to be ignorant and snobbish and lazy, to\
drive instead of walking, to eat and drink instead of thinking, to be\
waited upon instead of getting the education and the happiness that\
come from serving others. Don\'92t laugh at me. After all, while you and\
I--all our sort of men--are greedy, selfish grabbers, making thousands\
work for us, still we do build up big enterprises, we do set things to\
moving, and we do teach men the discipline of regular work by forcing\
them to work for us at more or less useful things.\'94\
\
No doubt you, gentle reader, have fallen asleep over this conversation.\
I understand perfectly that it is beyond you; for you have no\
conception of the deep underlying principles of the relations of men\
and men or men and women. But there may be among my readers a few who\
will see interest and importance in this talk with Armitage. It is\
time the writers of stories concerned themselves with the realities of\
life instead of with the showy and sensational things that obscure or\
hide the realities. What would you think of the physiologist who issued\
a treatise on physiology with no mention or account of the blood? Yet\
you read stories about what purports to be life with no mention or\
account of money--this, when in any society money is the all-important\
factor. Put aside, if you can, the prejudices of your miseducation and\
\'e6sthetics, of your false culture and your false refinement, open your\
mind, _think_, and you will see that I am right.\
\
When we were well down toward the end of the Park, Armitage said:\
\'93Pardon me a direct question. Have you and your wife separated?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said I. \'93She has gone abroad to round out Margot\'92s education--and\
her own.\'94\
\
\'93You know what that means?\'94\
\
\'93In a general way,\'94 replied I. \'93I\'92m letting them amuse themselves. They\
don\'92t need me, nor I them. Perhaps when they come back--\'94 I did not\
finish my sentence.\
\
He laughed. \'93That means you don\'92t really care what happens when they\
come back.\'94\
\
My smile was an admission of the correctness of his guess. We dropped\
our domestic affairs and took up the matters that were more interesting\
and more important to us.\
\
If you have good sight, unimpaired eyes, you go about assuming--when\
you think of it at all--that good sight is the rule in the world and\
impaired eyes the exception. But let your sight begin to fail, let\
your eyes become darkened, and soon you discover that you are one of\
thousands--that good sight is the exception, that almost everyone\
has something the matter with his eyes. The reason human beings know\
so little about human nature, the reason the sentimental flapdoodle\
about human virtues, in the present not very far-advanced stage of\
human evolution, is so widely believed and doubt of it so indignantly\
denounced as cynicism, lies in the fact that the average human being is\
ignorant of the afflictions of his own soul. This would be pleasant and\
harmless enough, and to destroy the delusion would be wickedly cruel,\
were it not that the only way to cure ailments of whatever sort is to\
diagnose them. What hope is there for the man devoured of a fever who\
fancies and insists that he is healthy? What hope is there for the man\
who eats pleasant-tasting slow poison under the impression that it is\
food? What a quaint notion it is that the truth, the sole source of\
health and happiness, is bad for some people, chiefly for those sick\
unto death through the falsehoods of ignorance and vanity! We humans\
are like the animal that claws and bites the surgeon who is trying to\
set its broken leg.\
\
But I am wandering a little. Discover that you have any ailment of\
body or of soul, and you soon discover how widespread that ailment is.\
You do not even appreciate how widespread, incessant, and poignant are\
the ravages of death until your own family and friends begin to die\
off. I had no notion of the extent of the social or domestic malady\
of abandoned husbands and fathers until I became one of that curious\
class.\
\
Among the masses there is the great and growing pestilence of abandoned\
wives--husbands, worn out by the uncertainties of the laboring man\'92s\
income, and disgusted with the incompetence of their wives and with the\
exasperations of the badly brought up children--such husbands flying by\
tens of thousands to escape what they cannot cure or endure. Among the\
classes, from the plutocracy down to and through the small merchants\
and professional men, I now discovered that there was a corresponding\
and reversed disease--the abandoned husband.\
\
The husband and father, working hard and presently accumulating enough\
for ease in his particular station of life, suddenly finds himself\
supporting, with perhaps all the money he can scrape together, a\
distant and completely detached family. He mails his money regularly,\
and with a fidelity that will appear grotesque, noble, or pitiful\
according to the point of view. In return he gets occasional letters\
from the loved ones--perfunctory these letters somehow sound, or would\
sound to the critical, though they are liberally sprinkled with loving,\
even fawning phrases, such as \'93dear, sweet papa\'94 and \'93darling husband.\'94\
Where are \'93the loved ones?\'94 If the family home is in a small town or\
country, they are in New York or some other city of America usually. If\
the family home is in the city, they are abroad. What are they doing?\
Sacrificing themselves! Especially poor wife and mother. She would\
infinitely prefer being at home with beloved husband. But she must\
not be selfish. She must carry her part of their common burden. While\
_he_ toils to provide for the children, _she_ toils in the loneliness\
or unhappiness of New York or Paris or Rome or Dresden or Genoa. And\
what is she toiling at in those desert places? Why, at educating the\
children!\
\
Sometimes it\'92s music. Sometimes it\'92s painting. Again it\'92s \'93finishing,\'94\
whatever that may mean, or plain, vague \'93education.\'94 There was a time\
when men of any sort could be instantly abashed, silenced and abased by\
the mere pronouncing of the word education. That happy day for mental\
fakers is nearing its close. Now, at the sound of the sacred word many\
a sensible, practical man has the courage to put on a grin. I have been\
credited with saying that a revival of the declining child-bearing\
among American women might be looked for, now that they have found the\
usefulness of children as an excuse for escape from home and husband.\
I admit having said this, but I meant it as a jest. However, there\
is truth in the jest. I don\'92t especially blame the women. Why should\
they stay at home when they have no sympathy with the things that\
necessarily engross the husband? Why stay at home when it bores them\
even to see that the servants carry on the house decently? Why stay at\
home when they simply show there from day to day how little they know\
about housekeeping? Why stay at home when there is an amiable fool\
willing to mail them his money, while they amuse themselves gadding\
about Europe or some big city of America?\
\
Abandoned wives at the one end of the social scale, abandoned husbands\
at the other end. Please note that in both cases the deep underlying\
cause is the same--money. Too little money, and the husband flies; too\
much money, and it is the wife who breaks up the family.\
\
As soon as I discovered, by being elected to membership, the existence\
of the universal order of abandoned husbands I took the liveliest\
interest in it. I was eager to learn whether there was another fool\
quite so foolish as myself, also whether the other fools were aware of\
their own folly. I found that most of them were rather proud of their\
membership, indulged in a ludicrous cocking of the comb and waggling of\
the wattles when they spoke of \'93my family over on the other side for a\
few years,\'94 or of \'93my wife, poor woman, exiled in Paris to cultivate my\
daughter\'92s voice,\'94 or of \'93my invalid wife--she has to live in the south\
of France. It\'92s a sad trial to us both.\'94\
\
Then--but this came much later--I discovered that these credulous,\
money-mailing fools, including myself, were not quite so imbecile, as\
a class, as they seemed to be. I discovered that they were secretly,\
often unconsciously, glad to be rid of their uncongenial families,\
and regarded any money they mailed as money well spent. They toiled\
cheerfully at distasteful tasks to get the wherewithal to keep their\
loved ones far, far away!\
\
The absence of Edna and Margot was an enormous relief to me. Edna was\
constantly annoying me to accompanying her to places to which I did\
not care to go. I like the theatre and I rather like some operas,\
but when I go to either it is for the sake of the performance. Going\
with Edna and her friends meant a tedious social function. We arrived\
late; we did not hear the play or the opera. As for the purely social\
functions, they were intolerable. Perhaps I should not have been so\
unhappy had I been the kind of man who likes to talk for the sake of\
hearing his own voice. Women are attentive listeners when the man who\
is talking is worth flattering. But I talk only for purpose, and when I\
listen I wish it to be to some purpose also. So, Edna, always urging me\
to do something distasteful or giving me the sense that she was about\
to ask me, or was irritated against me for being \'93disobliging\'94--Edna\
made me uncomfortable, increasingly uncomfortable as I grew more\
intelligent, more critical, more discriminating. As for Margot, I could\
not talk with her ten minutes without seeing protrude from her sweet\
loveliness some vulgarity of snobbishness. It irritated me to hear her\
speak to a servant. I had to rebuke her privately several times for\
the tone she used in addressing her governess or my secretary--this\
when her mother and all her mother\'92s friends used precisely the same\
repellent \'93gracious\'94 tone in the same circumstances. I saw that she,\
sometimes instinctively, again deliberately tried to hide her real self\
from me, that I was making a hypocrite of her. Any sort of frankness or\
sympathy between her and me was impossible.\
\
A few weeks after their departure I closed the house. It came to me\
that I need endure its discomforts no longer, that I could get rid of\
those smelly, dull-witted, low-minded foreign animals, that I need\
not endure food sent up from a kitchen as to which I had from time to\
time disgusting proofs that it was not clean. I closed the house and\
left the mice and roaches and other insects to such short provender\
as would be provided by caretaker and family. I took an apartment in a\
first-class hotel.\
\
When Armitage got clear of his wife he took the adjoining apartment.\
And how comfortable and how cheerful we were!\
\
The women with their incompetence and indifference have about destroyed\
the American home. To get good service, to have capable people\
assisting you, you must yourself be capable. The incapacity of the\
\'93ladies\'94 has driven good servants out of the business of domestic\
service, has left in it only the worthless and unreliable creatures\
who now take care of the homes. If you find any part of the laboring\
class deteriorating, don\'92t blame them. To do that is to get nowhere,\
is to be unjust and shallow to boot. Instead, look at the employers of\
that labor. Every time, you will find the fault is there, just as an\
ill-mannered or a bad child means unfaithful parents. The masses of\
mankind must have leadership, guidance, example. My experience has been\
that they respond when the dominating classes do their duty--that is,\
pay proper wages, demand good service, _and know what good service is_.\
\
What a relief and a joy that hotel was! Armitage and I had our own\
cook, and so could have the simple dishes we liked. We attended to the\
marketing--and both knew what sort of meat and vegetables and fruit to\
buy, and were not long trifled with by our butcher, our grocer, and our\
dairyman, spoiled though they were by the ladies. And our apartments\
were clean--really clean, and after the first few weeks our servants\
were contented, and abandoned the evil ways slip-shod mistresses had\
got them into. Pushing my inquiries, I found that not only our hotel,\
but every first-class hotel in the fashionable district was filled with\
the remnants of shattered homes--husbands who had compelled their wives\
to give up the expensive and dirty attempts at housekeeping; husbands\
who had abandoned their families in country homes or in other cities\
and towns and had, surreptitiously or boldly, returned to bachelor\
bliss; husbands who had been abandoned by their families, none of these\
last cases being more heart-breaking than Armitage\'92s or my own. The\
story ran that he was on the verge of melancholia because his beautiful\
wife had cast him off. There was no more truth in this than there would\
have been in a tale of my lonely grief. Had it not been for Armitage,\
pointing out to me the truth, I might have fancied myself a deserted\
unfortunate. It would not have been an isolated instance of a human\
being not knowing when he is well off.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
I did not see my family again until the following spring. Business\
compelled me to go abroad, and they had come over to London for the\
season.\
\
When I descended from the train at Euston, a little confused by the\
strangeness, I saw my wife a few yards down the platform. Beside her\
stood a tall, beautiful young woman, whom I did not instantly recognize\
as my daughter. Both were dressed with the perfection of taste and of\
detail that has made the American woman famous throughout the world. I\
like well-dressed women--and well-dressed men, too. I should certainly\
have been convicted of poor taste had I not been dazzled by those two\
charming examples of fashion and style. They looked like two lovely\
sisters, the elder not more than five or six years in advance of the\
younger. I was a youthful-looking man, myself--except, perhaps, when\
I was in the midst of affairs and took on the air of responsibility\
that cannot appear in the face of youth. But no one would have believed\
there were so few years between Edna and me. Nor was she in the least\
made-up. The youth was genuinely there.\
\
That meeting must have impressed the by-standers, who were observing\
the two women with admiring interest. I felt a glow of enthusiasm at\
sight of these elegant beauties. I was proud to be able to claim them.\
As for them, they became radiant the instant they saw me.\
\
\'93Godfrey!\'94 cried Edna loudly, rushing toward me.\
\
\'93Papa--dear old papa!\'94 cried Margot, waving her arms in a pretty\
gesture of impatient adoration while her mother was detaining me from\
her embrace.\
\
\'93Well--well!\'94 cried I. \'93What a pair of girls! My, but you\'92re tearing it\
off!\'94\
\
They laughed gayly, and hugged and kissed me all over again. For a\
moment I felt that I had been missed--and that I had missed them. A\
good-looking, shortish and shy young man, dressed and groomed in the\
attractive English upper-class way of exquisiteness with no sacrifice\
of manliness, was now brought forward.\
\
\'93Lord Crossley--my husband,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93Pleased, I\'92m sure,\'94 murmured the young man, giving me his hand with an\
awkwardness that was somehow not awkward--or, rather, that conveyed a\
subtle impression of good breeding. \'93Now that you\'92ve got him--or that\
he\'92s got you,\'94 proceeded he, \'93I\'92ll toddle along.\'94\
\
My wife gave him her hand carelessly. \'93Until dinner,\'94 she said.\
\
Margot shook hands with him, and nodded and smiled. When he was gone\
I observed the carriage near which we were standing--and I knew at\
once that it was my wife\'92s carriage. It was a grand car of state, yet\
quiet and simple. I often looked at it afterwards, trying to puzzle\
out how it contrived to convey two exactly opposite impressions. I\
could never solve the mystery. On the lofty box sat the most perfect\
model of a coachman I had seen up to that time. Beside the open door\
in the shallow, loftily hung body of the carriage stood an equally\
perfect footman. I was soon to get used to that marvelous English\
ability at specializing men--a system by which a man intended for a\
certain career is arrested in every other kind of growth, except only\
that which tends to make him more perfect for his purpose. Observing\
an English coachman, or valet or butler or what not, you say, \'93Here is\
a remarkably clever man.\'94 Yet you soon find out that he is practically\
imbecile in every other respect but his specialty.\
\
We entered the carriage, I sitting opposite the ladies--and most\
uncomfortable I was; for the carriage was designed to show off its\
occupants, and to look well in it they had to know precisely how to\
sit, which I did not. No one noticed me, however. There was too much\
pleasure to be got out of observing Edna and Margot, who were looking\
like duchesses out of a storybook. I knew they were delightfully\
conscious of the sensation they were making, yet they talked and\
laughed as if they were alone in their own sitting room--a trick which\
is part of that \'93education\'94 of which you have heard something, and will\
hear still more. The conversation seemed easy. In fact, it was only\
animated. It was a fair specimen of that whole mode of life. You have\
seen the wonderful peaches that come to New York from South Africa\
early in the winter--have delighted in their exquisite perfection of\
color and form. But have you ever tasted them? I would as lief eat\
sawdust; I would rather eat it--for, of sawdust I should expect nothing.\
\
\'93That young man is the Marquis of Crossley,\'94 said my wife.\
\
I liked to hear her pronounce a title in private. It gave you the sense\
of something that tasted fine--made you envy her the sensation she was\
getting. \'93Who is he?\'94 said I.\
\
Margot laughed na\'efvely--an entrancing display of white teeth and\
rose-lined mouth. \'93Marquis of Crossley, papa,\'94 she said. \'93That\'92s\
all--and quite enough it is.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know much about the big men in England,\'94 said I. \'93He looked\
rather young to amount to very much.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s as old as you are,\'94 said Edna, a flash of ill-humor appearing and\
vanishing.\
\
I was astonished. \'93I thought him a boy,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93He\'92s one of the greatest nobles in England--one of the greatest in\
Europe,\'94 said Edna--and I saw Margot\'92s eyes sparkling.\
\
\'93He seemed a nice fellow,\'94 said I amiably. \'93How you have grown, Margot!\'94\
\
\'93Hasn\'92t she, though!\'94 cried my wife. \'93Aren\'92t you proud of her?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m proud of you both,\'94 said I. \'93You make me feel old and dingy.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve been working too hard, poor dear,\'94 said Edna tenderly. \'93If you\
only would stay over here and learn the art of leisure.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m afraid I\'92d be dismally bored,\'94 said I.\
\
I had heard much about the art of loafing as practiced by Europeans,\
and I had not been attracted by what I had heard. It was inconceivable\
to me that intelligent grown men could pass their time at things about\
equal to marbles and tops. But I suppose I am abnormal, as they allege.\
Many men seem to look on mental effort of any kind as toilsome, and\
seize the first opportunity to return to the mindless frolickings of\
the beasts of the field. To me mental effort is a keen pleasure. And I\
must add I can\'92t help thinking it is to everybody who has real brains.\
\
The conversation would have died in distressing agony had it\
not been for the indomitable pluck of my wife. She struggled\
desperately--perhaps may even have deceived herself into thinking\
that she was glad to see me and that the carriage was the scene of a\
happy reunion. But I, who had a thorough training in quickly sizing up\
situations, saw the truth--that I was a rank outsider, to both wife and\
daughter; that they were strangers to me. I began to debate what was\
the shortest time I could decently stop in London.\
\
\'93We are to be presented at Court next week,\'94 said Edna.\
\
Margot\'92s eyes were again sparkling. It was the sort of look the\
novelists put on the sweet young girl\'92s face when she sees her lover\
coming.\
\
\'93Yes--next week--next Thursday,\'94 said Edna. \'93And so another of the\
little duchess\'92s dreams is coming true.\'94\
\
\'93Is it exciting?\'94 said I to Margot. Somehow reference to the \'93little\
duchess\'94 irritated me.\
\
\'93Rather!\'94 exclaimed Margot, fairly glowing with ecstasy. \'93You put\
on the most wonderful dress, and you drive in a long, long line of\
wonderful carriages, with all the women in wonderful dresses. And\
you go into the palace through lines and lines of gorgeous liveries\
and uniforms--and you wait in a huge grand room for an hour or so,\
frightened to death--and then you walk into the next room and make the\
courtesy you have been practicing for weeks--and you pass on.\'94\
\
\'93Good!\'94 cried I. \'93What then?\'94\
\
\'93Why you go home, half dead from the nervous shock. Oh, it\'92s wonderful!\'94\
\
It seemed to me--for I was becoming somewhat critical, as is the habit\
in moods of irritation--it seemed to me that Margot\'92s elaborate and\
costly education might have included the acquiring of a more extensive\
vocabulary. That word wonderful was beginning to get on my nerves.\
Still, this was hyper-criticism. A lovely woman does not need a\
vocabulary, or anything else but a lovely dress and plenty of money to\
provide background. \'93Yes--it must be--wonderful,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93We\'92ve been working at it for weeks, mamma and I,\'94 continued she. \'93I\'92m\
sure we shall do well. I can hardly wait. Just fancy! I\'92m to meet the\
_king_ and the _queen_!\'94\
\
I saw that Edna was in the same ecstatic trance. I leaned back and\
tried to distract myself with the novelty of London houses and crowds.\
It may be you understand the mingling of pity, contempt, anger, and\
amusement that filled my breast. If you do not understand, explanation\
would merely weary you. I was no longer proud of my beautiful family;\
I wished to get away from them, to forget them. Edna and Margot\
chatted on and on about the king and queen, about the various titled\
people they knew or hoped to know, about the thrills of aristocratic\
society. I tried not to listen. After a while I said, with I hope not\
unsuccessful attempt at amiability:\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry I shan\'92t be here to witness your triumph.\'94\
\
Across Edna\'92s face swept a flash of vivid--I had almost said\
vicious--annoyance. \'93You\'92re not going before the drawing-room at\
Buckingham Palace!\'94 cried she.\
\
\'93I\'92ll have to,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But you can\'92t!\'94 protested Margot, tears of vexation in her eyes.\
\'93Everyone will think it\'92s dreadfully queer.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t fret about that, my dear,\'94 replied I lightly. \'93I know how it is\
over here. So long as you\'92ve got the cash they\'92ll never ask a question.\
We Americans mean money to them--and that\'92s all.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, papa!\'94 cried Margot.\
\
\'93Don\'92t put such ideas into the child\'92s head, Godfrey,\'94 said my wife,\
restraining herself in a most ladylike manner.\
\
\'93She knows,\'94 said I. \'93So do you. Money is everything with aristocracies\
everywhere. They must live luxuriously without work. That can\'92t be done\
without money--lots of money. So aristocrats seriously think of nothing\
else, whatever they may talk.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll have a better opinion of them when you know them,\'94 said Edna,\
once more serene and sweetly friendly.\
\
\'93I don\'92t think badly of them,\'94 I replied. \'93I admire their cleverness.\
But you mustn\'92t ask me to respect them. They hardly expect it. They\
don\'92t respect themselves. If they did, they\'92d not be stealing, but\
working.\'94\
\
Margot listened with lowered eyes. I saw that she was ashamed of and\
for me. Edna concealed her feelings better. She forced an amiable\
smile. \'93I don\'92t know much about these things,\'94 she said politely.\
\'93But, Godfrey, you mustn\'92t desert us, at least not until after the\
drawing-room. I\'92ve told our ambassador you\'92re to be here, and he has\
gone to no end of trouble to arrange for you.\'94\
\
\'93Howard?\'94 said I. \'93That pup! I despise him. He\'92s a rotten old snob.\
They tell me his toadyism turns the stomach of even the English. He\'92s a\
disgrace to our country. But I suppose he\'92s little if any worse than\
most of our ambassadors over here. They\'92ve all bought their jobs to\
gratify their own and their wives\'92 taste for shoe polish.\'94\
\
This speech so depressed the ladies that their last remnant of vivacity\
fled, not to return. You are sympathizing with them, gentle reader,\
and they are welcome to your sympathy. We drove in silence the rest\
of the way to the hotel in Piccadilly, where they were installed in\
pompous luxury and had made equally luxurious provision for me. When I\
was alone with my valet I reasoned myself out of the grouchy mood into\
which the evidences of my family\'92s fresh access of folly had thrown\
me. To quarrel with them, to be irritated against them, was about as\
unreasonable as attacking a black man for not being white. I had long\
since realized, as the result of much experience and reflection, that\
character is no more to be changed than any other inborn quality.\
My wife had been born an aristocrat, and had brought into the world\
an aristocratic daughter. She was to be blamed neither for the one\
thing nor for the other. And it ill became my pretensions to superior\
intellect to gird at her and at Margot. The thing for me to do was to\
let them alone--keep away.\
\
At dinner, which was served in our apartment, I took a different tone\
with them, and they met me more than half way. So cheered was my lovely\
daughter that after dinner she perched on the arm of my chair and\
ventured to bring up the dangerous subject. Said she:\
\
\'93You\'92re not going to be mean to me and run away, are you, papa?\'94\
\
Looking at Edna, but addressing Margot, I replied: \'93Your mother will\
tell you that it\'92s best. We three never can agree in our ideas of\
things. I\'92m an irritation. I spoil your pleasure.\'94\
\
\'93No--no, indeed!\'94 cried the girl. \'93I\'92ve been looking forward to your\
coming. I\'92ve been telling everybody how handsome and superior you are.\
And I want them to see for themselves.\'94\
\
Most pleasant to hear from such rare prettiness, and most sincerely\
spoken.\
\
\'93So many of the American men in society over here are common,\'94\
proceeded she, \'93and even those who aren\'92t so very common somehow seem\
so. They are down on their knees before titles, and they act--like\
servants. Even Mr. Howard-- He oughtn\'92t to show his feelings so\
plainly. Of course we all feel impressed and honored by being taken up\
by real titled people of old families, but it\'92s such bad form to show,\
and it interferes with getting on. When I\'92m talking to Lord Crossley\
about that drawing-room, I act as if it were nothing.\'94\
\
\'93I see you are being well educated,\'94 said I, laughing.\
\
\'93Oh, yes. Mamma and I have worked. We\'92ve not had an idle moment.\'94\
\
\'93I believe you,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You _will_ stay, papa--won\'92t you?\'94\
\
I shook my head. But it was no longer the positive gesture. My\
besetting sin, my good nature, had possession of me. Remember, it was\
after dinner, and my beautiful daughter was caressing my cheek and was\
pleading in a voice whose modulations had been cultivated by the best\
masters in Paris.\
\
\'93But I don\'92t want people to think I was deceiving them about my papa.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m willing to be exhibited to a select few in the next two or three\
days,\'94 I conceded. \'93They will tell the others.\'94\
\
And with that they had to be content. In the faint hope of inducing me\
to change my mind, Edna--the devoid of the sense of humor--took me to\
a tailor\'92s and had me shown pictures and models of the court costume I\
would wear. But I remained firm. A sense of humor would have warned her\
that a person of my sort would have an aversion to liveries of every\
kind, to any costume that stamps a man as one of a class. I am perhaps\
foolishly jealous of my own individuality. But I cannot help it. A\
king in his robes, a general in his uniform--except in battle where\
it\'92s as necessary and useful as night shirt or pajamas in bed--any\
sort of livery seems pitiful and contemptible to me. I will wear the\
distinguishing dress of the human race and the male sex, but further\
than that classification I refuse to move. Also, what business had I,\
citizen of a democracy whose chief idea is the barbarism and silliness\
of aristocracy--what business had I going to see a king and a queen?\
I should have felt that I was aiding them in the triumph of dragging\
democracy at their chariot wheels. No, I would not go to levees and\
drawing-rooms. You may say I showed myself an absurd extremist. Well,\
perhaps so. But, as it seems to be necessary to go to one extreme\
or the other, I prefer the extreme of exaggerated and vainglorious\
self-respect.\
\
\'93The king and queen are no doubt nice people,\'94 said I to Margot. \'93But\
if I meet them, it must be on terms of equality--and for some purpose\
less inane than exchanging a few set phrases.\'94\
\
Edna and Margot seemed to feel that they had, on the whole, a\
presentable specimen of male relative to exhibit; for they made the\
most of the four days I gave them. Through Hilda Armitage, now Lady\
Blankenship, and much freshened up by the more congenial atmosphere,\
they had got in with the set that is the least easy of access to\
Americans--though, of course, it is not actually difficult for any\
American with plenty of money and a willingness to spend and good\
guidance in how to spend. And I must admit I enjoyed myself in those\
four days. The women were, for the most part, rather slow, though I\
recall two who had real intelligence, and I don\'92t think there was a\
single one quite so devoid of knowledge of important subjects as our\
boasted \'93bright\'94 American women. The men were distinctly attractive.\
They had information, they had breadth--the thing the upper-class\
men of America often lack. Also, they were entirely free from that\
ill-at-easeness about their own and their neighbor\'92s position in\
society which makes the American upper classes tiresome and ridiculous.\
\
It amused me to observe the Americans in this environment. Both our\
women and our men seemed uneasy, small, pinched. You could distinguish\
the American man instantly by his pinched, tight expression of an\
upper servant out for a holiday. I could feel the same thing in our\
women, but I doubt not their looks and dress and vivacity concealed\
it from the Englishmen. Anyhow, women are used to being nothing in\
themselves, to taking rank and form from their surroundings. While\
with us it seems to be true that the women are wholly responsible for\
social position with all its nonsense, the deeper truth is that they\
owe everything to the possessions of their fathers or husbands. Without\
that backing they would be nothing. Everything must ultimately rest\
upon a substantiality. In themselves, unsupported, the women\'92s swollen\
pretensions would vanish into thin air.\
\
Lord Crossley was to have dined with us my first evening in London, but\
was prevented by suddenly arising business in the country. Next day\
he came to lunch, and I at once saw that he was after Margot hammer\
and tongs. I discovered it not by the way he treated her, but by his\
attitude toward her mother and me. He seemed a thoroughly satisfactory\
young man in every way, and I especially liked his frankness and\
simplicity. Edna had devoted a large part of a long sight-seeing tour\
with me to an account of his grandeur in the British aristocracy.\
Having had experience at that time of the American brand of aristocracy\
only, I was ignorant of the European kinds that have the aristocratic\
instinct in the most acute form--the ingrowing form. I know now that\
our own sort, unpleasant and unsightly though it is, cannot compare in\
malignance, in littleness and meanness of soul with the European sort.\
Just as the noisy blowhard is a modest fellow and harmless, and on\
acquaintance lovable in comparison with the silent, brooding egotist,\
just so is the American aristocrat in comparison with the European.\
An American aristocrat has been known to forget himself and be human.\
I recall no instance of that sort in an European born and bred to the\
notion that his flesh and blood are of a subtler material than the\
flesh and blood of most men. However, as I was saying, at the time of\
my first visit to Europe I knew nothing of these matters, and Lord\
Crossley seemed to me a simple, ingenuous young man, most attractively\
boyish for his years.\
\
\'93That chap wants to marry Margot,\'94 said I to Edna when we were alone\
later in the afternoon.\
\
\'93I think so,\'94 said she. \'93Several young men wish to marry her. But she\
is in no hurry. She\'92s not nineteen yet, and she would like a duke.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure,\'94 said I. \'93But she may not be able to love a duke.\'94\
\
\'93I never heard of a girl who wouldn\'92t love a duke if she got the\
chance,\'94 said Edna. \'93There are only five--English dukes, I mean--who\
are eligible. Margot has met three of them--and one, the Duke of\
Brestwell, has taken quite a fancy to her.\'94 Carelessly, but with\
nervous anxiety underneath, \'93You wouldn\'92t have any objection?\'94\
\
\'93I? Why?\'94\
\
\'93Oh--you are so--so peculiar in some ways.\'94\
\
\'93Anyone who pleases Margot will suit me,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93We were afraid you\'92d be prejudiced against titles. You\'92ve been with\
that eccentric Mr. Armitage so much--and you always have been against\
the sort of things Margot and I like.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve no objection to titles,\'94 said I. \'93In fact, I think Margot will be\
happier if she marries a title. You\'92ve educated her so well that she\'92ll\
never see the man or think of him.\'94\
\
\'93How little you know her!\'94 cried Edna, pathetically. \'93And how unjust\
to me your prejudices make you. I\'92ve brought her up to be all\
refinement--all sentiment--all heart. She looks only at the highest and\
best.\'94\
\
\'93At the duke,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Certainly at the duke,\'94 said she. \'93Her tastes are for the life where a\
woman can show her beauty of soul to the best advantage and can do the\
most good. There is no career for a woman in America. But over here a\
woman married into the aristocracy has a real career.\'94\
\
\'93At what?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93As a recognized social leader. As a leader in charities and all sorts\
of good movements.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, I see,\'94 said I--and there I stopped, for I had learned not to\
argue with my wife--or with anyone else, male or female--when the\
subject is sheer twaddle. \'93Yes, I think Margot would do well to marry\
over here and to have a dazzling career. I\'92m sure she\'92d never get tired\
of this--pardon me--treadmill. I observe that it\'92s better organized\
than the imitation one we have over in \'91the States.\'92\'94\
\
\'93I should say!\'94 cried Edna. \'93You\'92ve no idea how cheap and common the\
best you have in New York is beside the social life here. I\'92ve been\
here only a year, but already there have been the greatest changes in\
me. Don\'92t you notice?\'94\
\
\'93I do,\'94 said I. \'93And I can honestly say you have changed for the\
better. You\'92ve learned to cover it up.\'94\
\
She looked inquiringly at me, but I did not care to explain what the\
\'93it\'94 was that she had learned to cover. A slight flush appeared in\
her cheeks, and I knew intuitively that she thought I was alluding to\
her humble origin. I did not disabuse her mind of this impression.\
She would have been angry had I explained that I meant her social\
ambitions which I thought vulgar and she thought refined. Both she\
and Margot, except in occasional unguarded moments in privacy, had\
indeed vastly improved in manners. They had learned the trick of the\
aristocrats they associated with--the trick of affecting simplicity and\
equality and quietly confident ease. There was a notable difference,\
and altogether in their favor, between their manners and the manners\
of the former Mrs. Armitage and other American women. Whatever might\
justly be said in the way of criticism of my wife, it assuredly could\
not be said that she was lacking in agility at \'93catching on.\'94 Armitage\
once said to me, \'93Your wife is a marvelous woman. I never saw or heard\
of her making a break.\'94 This tribute can be appreciated only when you\
recall whence she sprung--and how much of her origin remained with\
her--necessarily--through all her climbings and soarings.\
\
\'93You prefer it over here?\'94 said I--we were still driving.\
\
\'93If it weren\'92t for you, I\'92d never go back,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93For me?\'94 said I. \'93Oh, don\'92t bother about me.\'94\
\
\'93But I do,\'94 replied she sweetly. And her hand covertly stole into mine\
for a moment. \'93Sometimes I get so homesick, Godfrey, that\'92s it all I\
can do to fight off the impulse to take the first steamer.\'94\
\
I tried to look as a man should on hearing such pleasant and\
praiseworthy sentiments from the wife of his bosom.\
\
\'93You\'92ve acted cold and--and reserved with me,\'94 she went on. \'93I wanted\
to come to you last night. But I hadn\'92t the courage. You are such a\
mixture of tenderness and--and aloofness. You have the power to make\
even me feel like a stranger.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sure I don\'92t mean to be that way,\'94 said I, thoroughly\
uncomfortable.\
\
\'93Margot was speaking of it,\'94 proceeded Edna. \'93She said--poor\
affectionate child--that she hardly dared put her arms round you and\
kiss you. You oughtn\'92t to repulse the child that way, Godfrey. She\
has a tender, loving heart. And she adores you. She and I talk of you\
a long time every day. I\'92d insist on it as a matter of duty--for I\'92d\
not let your child forget you. But I don\'92t need to insist. She refers\
everything to you, and whenever she\'92s unusually happy, she always says:\
\'91If papa could only be enjoying this with us!\'92\'94\
\
I saw that she had worked herself up into a state of excitement.\
My good sense told me that there was no genuineness in either her\
affection or Margot\'92s. But I had no doubt they both thought themselves\
genuine. And that was quite enough to give me, the easy-going American\
slob of a husband and father, an acute attack of guilty conscience. The\
upshot was----\
\
But you who have an impressionable heart and a keen sense of your own\
shortcomings can guess what it was. Edna and I resumed the relations\
of affectionate husband and wife for the rest of my--brief--stop in\
London. I remained several days longer than I had intended--stayed\
on because I did not wish to hurt her feelings. And I bought her\
and Margot all sorts of jewelry and gew-gaws, largely increased her\
personal fortune, did not utter a word that would ruffle either of\
them. And I left them convinced that I was going only because business\
not to be neglected compelled.\
\
They say that the hypocrite wife is a common occurrence. I wonder if\
the hypocrite husband is rare. I wonder if there are not more instances\
than this one of the husband and the wife playing a cross game of\
hypocrisy, with each fancying the other deceived?\
\
So busy was I with my own laborings to deceive my wife as to the true\
state of my feelings toward her that not until I was halfway across\
the Atlantic did I happen to think the obvious thought. You, gentle\
reader, have not thought it. But perhaps some more intelligent species\
of reader has. In mid-Atlantic, I suddenly thought: \'93Why she--she and\
Margot--were playing a game--the same game. For what purpose?\'94\
\
It was not many months before I found out.\
\
\
\
\
VII\
\
\
That summer Armitage was spending the week ends out on Long Island\
at the country place of his sister, Mrs. Kirkwood. He kept his\
yacht in the tiny harbor there and made short cruises in the\
Sound and up the New England coast. Naturally I often went with\
him. Those parties usually amused me. He knew a dozen interesting\
people--working people--such as Boris Raphael, the painter, and his\
wife, the architect, the Horace Armstrongs who had been divorced and\
remarried, a novelist named Beechman who wrote about the woods and\
lived in the wilderness in the Southwest most of the year, Susan Lenox\
the actress--several others of the same kind. Then there was his\
sister--Mary Kirkwood.\
\
For a reason which will presently appear I have not before spoken of\
Mrs. Kirkwood, though I had known her longer than I had known Armitage.\
Her husband had been treasurer of the road when I was an under Vice\
President. He speculated in the road\'92s funds and it so happened that,\
when he was about to be caught, I was the only man who could save him\
from exposure. Instead of asking me directly, he sent his wife to me.\
I can see her now as she was that day--pale, haggard, but with that\
perfect composure which deceives the average human being into thinking,\
\'93Here is a person without nerves.\'94 She told me the whole story in\
the manner of one relating a matter in which he has a sympathetic but\
remote interest. She made not the smallest attempt to work upon my\
feelings, to move me to pity. \'93And,\'94 she ended, \'93if you will help him\
cover up the shortage, it will be made good and he will resign. I shall\
see to it that he does not take another position of trust.\'94\
\
\'93Why didn\'92t he come to me, himself?\'94 said I. \'93Why did he send you?\'94\
\
She looked at me--a steady gaze from a pair of melancholy gray eyes. \'93I\
cannot answer that,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93I beg your pardon,\'94 stammered I; for I guessed the answer to my\
question even as I was asking it. I knew the man--an arrogant coward,\
with the vanity to lure him into doing preposterous things and wilting\
weakness the instant trouble began to gather. \'93You wish me to save\
him?\'94 I said, still confused and not knowing how to meet the situation.\
\
\'93I am asking rather for myself,\'94 replied she. \'93I married him against\
my father\'92s wishes and warning. I have not loved him since the second\
month of our marriage. If he should be exposed, I think the disgrace\
would kill me.\'94 Her lip curled in self-scorn. \'93A queer kind of pride,\
isn\'92t it?\'94 she said. \'93To be able to live through the real shame, and to\
shrink only from the false.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll do it,\'94 said I, with a sudden complete change of intention. \'93That\
is, if you promise me he will resign and not try to get a similar\
position elsewhere.\'94\
\
\'93I promise,\'94 said she, rising, to show that she was taking not a moment\
more of my time than was unavoidable. \'93And I thank you\'94--and that was\
all.\
\
I kept my part of the agreement; she kept hers. In about two years she\
divorced him because he was flagrantly untrue to her. He married the\
woman and supported her and himself on the allowance Mary Kirkwood\
made him as soon as her father\'92s death let her into her share of the\
property. When I saw her again--one night at dinner at her brother\'92s\
house, before his wife divorced him--we met as if we were entire\
strangers. Neither of us made the remotest allusion to that first\
meeting.\
\
Going down to her house with Armitage often and being with her on the\
yacht for days together, I became fairly well acquainted with her,\
although she maintained the reserve which she did not increase for a\
stranger or drop even with her brother. You felt as if her personality\
were a large and interesting house, with room after room worth\
seeing, most attractive--but that no one ever was admitted beyond the\
drawing-room, not for a glimpse.\
\
Don\'92t picture her as of the somber sort of person. A real tragedy\
can befall only a person with a highly sensitive nature. Such\
persons always have sense of proportion and sense of humor. They do\
not exaggerate themselves; they see the amusing side of the antics\
of the human animal. So they do not pull long faces and swathe\
themselves in yards of cr\'eape and try to create an impression of\
dark and gloomy sorrow. They do not find woe a luxury; they know it\
in its grim horror. They strive to get the joy out of life. So,\
looking at Mary Kirkwood, you would never have suspected a secret\
of sadness, a blighted life. As her reserve did not come from\
self-consciousness--either the self-consciousness of haughtiness or\
that of shyness and greenness--you did not even suspect reserve until\
you had known her long and had tried in vain to get as well acquainted\
with her as you thought you were at first. I imagine that in our talk\
in my office about her husband I got further into the secret of her\
than anyone else ever had.\
\
One detail I shall put by itself, so important does it seem to me.\
She had a keen sense of humor. It was not merely passive, merely\
appreciation, as the sense of humor is apt to be in women--where it\
exists at all. It was also active; she said droll and even witty\
things. When her sense of humor was aroused, her eyes were bewitching.\
\
What did she look like? The women all wish to know this; for, being\
fond of the evanescent triumphs over the male which beauty of face\
or form gives, and as a rule having experience only of those petty\
victories, they fancy that looks are the important factor, the\
all-important factor. In fact, the real conquests of women are not won\
by looks. Beauty, or, rather, physical charm of some kind, is the lure\
that draws the desired male within range. If after pausing a while he\
finds nothing more, he is off again.\
\
Perhaps, probably, my experience with Edna has made me more indifferent\
to looks than the average man who has never realized his longing to\
possess a physically beautiful woman. However that may be, Mary\
Kirkwood certainly had no cause to complain that Nature had not\
been generous to her in the matter of looks. She was tall, she was\
slender. She had a delicate oval face, a skin that was clear and\
smooth and dark with the much prized olive tints in it. She had a\
beautiful long neck, a great quantity of almost black hair. Her nose\
suggested pride, her mouth mockery, her eyes sincerity. She was the\
kind of woman who exercises a powerful physical fascination over men,\
and at the same time makes them afraid to show their feelings. Women\
like that tantalize with visions of what they could and would give\
the man they loved, but make each man feel that it would be idle for\
him to hope. In character she was very different from her cynical,\
mocking brother--was, I imagine, more like her father. Mentally the\
resemblance between the brother and sister was strong--but she took\
pains to conceal how much she knew, where he found his chief pleasure\
in \'93showing off.\'94 I feel I have fallen pitifully short of doing her\
justice in this description. But who can put into words such a subtlety\
as charm? She had it--for men. Women did not like her--nor she them. I\
state this without fear of prejudicing either women or men against her.\
Why is it, by the way, that to say a man does not like men and is not\
liked by them is to damn him utterly, while to say that a woman neither\
likes nor is liked by her own sex is rather to speak in her favor? You\
cry indignantly, \'93Not true!\'94 gentle reader. But--do _you_ know what is\
true and what not true? And, if you did, would you confess it, even to\
yourself?\
\
You are proceeding to revenge yourself upon me. You are saying, \'93_Now_\
we know _why_ he was indifferent to his beautiful wife and to his\
lovely daughter!--_Now_ we understand that fit of guilty conscience in\
London!\'94\
\
Do you know? Perhaps. I am not sure. I am not conscious of any especial\
interest in Mary Kirkwood until after I came back from London. I\
had seen her but a few times. We had never talked so long as five\
consecutive minutes, and then we had talked commonplaces. Not the\
commonplaces of fashionable people, but the commonplaces of intelligent\
people. There\'92s an enormous difference.\
\
The first time my memory records her with the vividness of moving\
pictures is, of course, at that meeting in my office. The next time is\
a few days after my return from London. I had been surfeited both in\
London and on the steamer with the inane amateurs at life, the shallow\
elegant dabblers in it, interesting themselves only in coaching,\
bridge, and similar pastimes worthy an asylum for the feeble-minded. I\
went down to the Kirkwood place with Armitage. As his sister was not in\
the house we set out for a walk through the grounds to find her. At the\
outer edge of the gardens a workman told us that if we would follow a\
path through the swampy woods we could not miss her.\
\
The path was the roughest kind of a trail. Our journey was beset with\
swarms of insects, most of them mosquitoes in savage humor. It lay\
along the course of a sluggish narrow stream that looked malarious\
and undoubtedly was. \'93Landscape gardening is one of Mary\'92s fads,\'94\
explained her brother. \'93She has been planning to tackle this swamp for\
several years. Now she is at it.\'94\
\
In the depths of the morass we came upon her. She was in man\'92s\
clothes--laboring man\'92s clothes. Her face and neck were protected by\
veils, her hands by gloves. She was toiling away with a gang of men at\
clearing the ground where the drains were to center in an artificial\
lake. Armitage called several times before she heard. Then she dropped\
her ax and came forward to meet us. There was certainly nothing of what\
is usually regarded as feminine allure about her. Yet never had I seen\
a woman more fascinating. There undoubtedly was charm in her face and\
in her strong, slender figure. But I believe the real charm of charms\
for me was the spectacle of a woman usefully employed. A woman actually\
doing something. A woman!\
\
After the greeting she said: \'93The only way I can get the men to work\
in this pesthole is by working with them.\'94 She smiled merrily. \'93One\
doesn\'92t look so well as in a fresh tennis suit wielding a racket. But I\
can\'92t bear doing things that have no results.\'94\
\
\'93My father insisted on bringing us up in the commonest way and with the\
commonest tastes,\'94 said Armitage, \'93and Mary has remained even less the\
lady than I am the gentleman.\'94\
\
As the mosquitoes were tearing us to pieces Mrs. Kirkwood ordered us\
back to the house. Before we were out of sight she was leading on her\
gang and wielding the ax again. At dinner she appeared in all the\
radiance and grace of the beautiful woman with fondness for and taste\
in dress. She explained to me her plan--how swamp and sluggish, rotting\
brook were to be transformed into a wooded park with a swift, clear\
stream and a succession of cascades. I may add, she carried out the\
plan, and the results were even beyond what my imagination pictured as\
she talked.\
\
This first view of her life in the country set me to observing her\
closely--perhaps more closely and from a different standpoint than a\
man usually observes a woman. In all she did I saw the same rare and\
fascinating imagination--the only kind of imagination worth while. Of\
all its stupidities and follies none so completely convicts the human\
race of shallowness and bad taste as its notions of what is romantic\
and idealistic. The more elegant the human animal flatters itself it\
is, the poorer are its ideals--that is, the further removed from the\
practical and the useful. So, you rarely find a woman with so much true\
poetry, true romance, true imagination as to keep house well. But Mary\
Kirkwood kept house as a truly great artist paints a picture, as a\
truly great composer creates an opera. In all her house there was not a\
trace of the crude, costly luxury that rivals the squalor and bareness\
of poverty in repulsiveness to people of sense and taste. But what\
comfort! What splendid cooking, what perfection of service. The chairs\
and sofas, the beds, the linen, the hundred and one small but important\
devices for facilitating the material side of life, and so putting mind\
and spirit in the mood for their best-- But I despair of making you\
realize. I should have to catalogue, describe, contrast through page\
after page. And when I had finished, those who understand what the\
phrase art of living means would have read only what they already know,\
while those who do not understand that phrase would be convulsed with\
the cackling laughter that is the tribute of mush-brain to intellect.\
\
Observing Mary Kirkwood I discovered a great truth about the woman\
question: the crudest indictment of the intellect of woman is the\
crude, archaic, futile, and unimaginative way in which is carried on\
the part of life that is woman\'92s peculiar work--or, rather, is messed,\
muddled, slopped, and neglected. No doubt this is not their fault. But\
it soon will be if they don\'92t bestir themselves. Already there are\
American men not a few who apologize for having married as a folly of\
their green and silly youth.\
\
So, gentle reader, though my enthusiasm tempts me to describe Mary\
Kirkwood\'92s housekeeping in detail, I shall spare you. You would not\
read. You would not understand if you did.\
\
The first time she and I approached the confidential was on an August\
evening when we were alone on the upper deck of the yacht. The others\
were in the cabin playing bridge. We had been sitting there perhaps an\
hour when she rose.\
\
\'93Don\'92t go,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I thought you wished to be alone,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Why did you think that?\'94\
\
\'93Your way of answering me. You\'92ve been almost curt.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry. I can\'92t promise to talk if you stay. But I hate to be left\
alone with my thoughts.\'94\
\
\'93I understand,\'94 said she. And she seated herself beside the rail, and\
with my assistance lighted a cigarette.\
\
There was a moon somewhere above the awning which gave us a roof. By\
the dim, uncertain light I could make out her features. It seemed to\
me she was staying as much on her own account as on mine--because she,\
too, wished not to be alone with her thoughts. I had not in a long time\
seen her in a frankly serious mood.\
\
\'93How much better off a man is than a woman,\'94 said I. \'93A man has his\
career to think about, while a woman usually has only herself.\'94\
\
\'93Only herself,\'94 echoed she absently. \'93And if one is able to think,\
oneself is an unsatisfactory subject.\'94\
\
\'93Extremely,\'94 said I. \'93Faults, follies, failures.\'94\
\
For a time I watched the faintly glowing end of her cigarette and the\
slim fingers that held it gracefully. Then she said:\
\
\'93Do you believe in a future life?\'94\
\
\'93Does anyone feel _sure_ of any life but this?\'94\
\
\'93Then this is one\'92s only chance to get what one wants--what\'92s worth\
while.\'94\
\
\'93What _is_ worth while?\'94 I inquired, feeling the charm of her quiet,\
sweet voice issuing upon the magical stillness. \'93What _is_ worth while?\'94\
\
She laughed softly. \'93What one wants.\'94\
\
\'93And what do _you_ want?\'94\
\
She drew her white scarf closer about her bare shoulders, smiled\
queerly out over the lazily rippling waters. \'93Love and children,\'94 she\
said. \'93I\'92m a normal woman.\'94\
\
That amused me. \'93Normal? Why, you\'92re unique--eccentric. Most women\
want money--and yet more money--and yet more money--for more and more\
and always more show.\'94\
\
\'93You must want the same thing,\'94 retorted she. \'93You\'92re too sensible not\
to know you can\'92t possibly do any good to others with money. So you\
must want it for your own selfish purposes. It\'92s every bit as much for\
show when you have it tucked away in large masses for people to gape at\
as if you were throwing it round as the women do.... If anything, your\
passion is cruder than theirs.\'94\
\
\'93I think I make money,\'94 said I, \'93for the same reasons that a hen lays\
eggs or a cow gives milk--because I can\'92t help it; because I can\'92t do\
anything else and must do something.\'94\
\
\'93Did you ever try to do anything else?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 I admitted. Then I added, \'93I never had the chance.\'94\
\
\'93True,\'94 she said reflectively. \'93A hen can\'92t give milk and a cow can\'92t\
lay eggs.\'94\
\
\'93For some time,\'94 I went on, \'93I\'92ve been trying to find something else\
to do. Something interesting. No, not exactly that either. I must find\
some way of reviving my interest in life. The things I am doing would\
be interesting enough if I could be interested in anything at all. But\
I\'92m not.\'94\
\
She nodded slowly. \'93I\'92m in the same state,\'94 said she. \'93I\'92ve about\
decided what to do.\'94\
\
\'93Yes?\'94 said I encouragingly.\
\
\'93Marry again,\'94 replied she.\
\
I laughed outright. \'93That\'92s very unoriginal,\'94 said I. \'93It puts you in\
with the rest of the women. Marrying is all _they_ can think of doing.\'94\
\
\'93But you don\'92t quite understand,\'94 said she. \'93_I_ want children. I\
am thinking of selecting some trustworthy man with good physical\
and mental qualities. I have had experience. I ought to be able to\
judge--and not being in love with him I shall not be so likely to\
make a mistake. I shall marry, and the children will give me love and\
occupation. You may laugh, but I tell you the only occupation worthy of\
a man or a woman is bringing up children. All the rest--for men as well\
as for women--is--is like a hen laying eggs to rot in the weeds....\
Bringing up children to develop us, to give us a chance to make them an\
improvement on ourselves. That\'92s the best.\'94\
\
As the full meaning of what she had said unfolded I was filled with\
astonishment. How clear and simple--how true. Why had I not seen this\
long ago--why had it been necessary to have it pointed out by another?\
\'93I believe--yes, I\'92m sure--that\'92s what I\'92ve been groping for,\'94 I said\
to her.\
\
\'93I thought you\'92d understand,\'94 said she, and most flattering was her\
tone of pleasure at my obvious admiration.\
\
Thus our friendship was born.\
\
I could not but envy her freedom to seek to satisfy the longing I thus\
discovered in my own heart. So strongly did the mood for confidence\
possess me that only my long and hard training in self-restraint held\
me from the disloyalty of speaking my thoughts. I said:\
\
\'93It\'92s dismal to grow old with no ties in the oncoming generation. The\
sense of the utter futility of life would weigh more and more heavily.\
I\'92m surprised that you\'92ve realized it so young.\'94\
\
\'93A woman realizes it earlier than a man,\'94 she reminded me. \'93For a woman\
has no career to interfere and prevent her seeing the truth.\'94\
\
A woman! Rather, a rare occasional Mary Kirkwood. Most women never\
looked beyond the gratification of the crudest, easiest vanities and\
appetites. \'93Yes, you are right,\'94 I continued. \'93You ought to marry--as\
soon as you can. The man isn\'92t important, except in the ways you\
spoke of. So far as man and woman love is concerned, that quickly\
passes--where it ever exists at all. But the bond of father, mother,\
and children is enduring--at least, I\'92m sure _you_ would make it so.\'94\
\
We sat lost in thought for some time--I reflecting moodily upon my own\
baffled and now seemingly hopeless longing, she probably busy with the\
ideas suggested in her next speech.\
\
\'93The main trouble is money,\'94 said she. \'93Except for that my husband\
would have been all right. When we first met he did not know my family\
had wealth. He thought I belonged to another and poor branch. And I\
think he cared for me, and would have been the man I sought but for the\
money. It roused a dormant side of his nature, and everything went to\
pieces.\'94\
\
\'93Then, marry a rich man,\'94 I suggested.\
\
She shook her head. \'93I don\'92t know a single rich man--except _possibly_\
my brother--who isn\'92t obsessed about money. The rich have a craving to\
be richer that\'92s worse than the desire of the poor to be rich.... I\
don\'92t know what to do. I couldn\'92t bring up children in the atmosphere\
of wealth and caste and show--the sort of atmosphere a man or woman\
crazy about money insists on creating. My father was right. He was a\
really wise man. I owe to him every good instinct and good idea I have.\'94\
\
\'93But you must have seen some man who promised well. I think you\
can trust to your judgment. You mustn\'92t defeat your one chance for\
happiness by overcaution.\'94\
\
Again she was silent for several minutes. Then she said, with a queer\
laugh and an embarrassed movement: \'93I have seen such a man--lately. I\
like him. I think I could like him more than a little. I\'92ve an idea he\
might care for me if I\'92d let him. But--I don\'92t know.\'94\
\
I saw that she longed to confide, but wished to be questioned. \'93Here on\
the yacht?\'94 said I.\
\
She nodded.\
\
\'93Beechman?\'94\
\
She laughed shyly yet with amusement.\
\
\'93That was an easy guess,\'94 said I. \'93He\'92s the only man of us free to\
marry.\'94\
\
\'93What do you think of him?\'94\
\
\'93The very man I\'92d say,\'94 replied I. \'93He\'92s good to look at--clever,\
healthy, and honest. He isn\'92t money-mad. He could make quite a splurge\
with what he has, yet he doesn\'92t. He is a serious man--does not let\
them tempt him into fashionable society or any other kind.\'94\
\
\'93What are the objections?\'94 said she. \'93My father trained us to look for\
the rotten spots, as he called them. He said one ought to hunt them out\
and examine them carefully. Then if, in spite of them, the thing still\
looked good, why there was a chance of its being worth taking.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s precisely my way of proceeding in business,\'94 said I. \'93It\'92s a\
pity it isn\'92t used in every part of life--from marketing up to choosing\
a friend or a husband.\'94\
\
\'93Well, what are the \'91rotten spots\'92 in Mr. Beechman?\'94\
\
\'93I haven\'92t looked for them,\'94 said I. \'93No doubt they\'92re there, but as\
they\'92re not obvious they may be unimportant.\'94\
\
\'93Can\'92t you think of _any_?\'94\
\
She was laughing, and so was I. Poor Beechman, down in the cabin\
absorbed in bridge, how amazed he\'92d have been if he could have heard!\
In my mind\'92s eye I was looking him over--a tall, fair man with good\
smooth-shaven features.\
\
\'93He\'92s getting bald rather rapidly for a man of thirty or thereabouts,\'94\
said I.\
\
\'93I don\'92t like baldness,\'94 said she. \'93But I can endure it.\'94\
\
\'93He is distinctly vain of his looks and his strength. But he has cause\
to be.\'94\
\
\'93All men are physically vain,\'94 said she. \'93And they can\'92t help it,\
because it is the hereditary quality of the male from fishes and\
reptiles up.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s inclined to be opinionated, and his point of view is narrow.\'94\
\
\'93I think I might hope to educate him out of that,\'94 said she. \'93I can be\
tactful.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s certainly not a serious objection.\'94\
\
\'93Any other spots?\'94\
\
\'93He has a certain--a certain--lack of vigor. It\'92s a thing I\'92ve observed\
in all professional men, except those of the first rank, those who are\
really men of action.\'94\
\
She nodded. \'93I was waiting for that,\'94 said she. \'93It\'92s the thing that\
has made me hesitate.\'94 She laughed outright. \'93What a conceited speech!\
But I\'92m exposing myself fully to you.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I am picking him to pieces as if I thought myself perfection. As a\
matter of fact, I know he\'92d fly from me if he saw me as I am.\'94 She\
reflected, laughed quietly. \'93But he never would know me as I am. An\
unconventional woman--if she\'92s sensible--only shows enough of her\
variation from the pattern to make herself interesting--never enough to\
be alarming.\'94\
\
\'93You are unconventional?\'94\
\
\'93You didn\'92t suspect it?\'94\
\
\'93No. You smoke cigarettes--but that has ceased to be unconventional.\'94\
\
\'93I rather thought you had a favorable opinion of my intelligence,\'94 said\
she.\
\
\'93So I have,\'94 said I. \'93To be perfectly frank, you seemed to me to have\
as good a mind as your brother.\'94\
\
\'93That is flattering,\'94 said she, immensely pleased, and with reason.\
\'93Well, if you thought so favorably of my intelligence, how could you\
believe me conventional?\'94\
\
\'93I see,\'94 said I. \'93No one who thinks can be conventional.\'94\
\
\'93Conventionality,\'94 said she, \'93was invented to save some people the\
trouble of thinking and to prevent others from being outrageous through\
trying to think when they\'92ve nothing to think with.\'94\
\
\'93That is worth remembering and repeating,\'94 laughed I. \'93Personally,\
I\'92m deeply grateful for conventionality. You see, I came up from the\
bottom, and I find it satisfactory to be able to refer to the rules in\
all the things I knew nothing about.\'94\
\
\'93My brother says the most remarkable thing about you--and your wife--\
Do you mind my telling you?\'94\
\
\'93Go on,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93He says most people who come up are alternately hopeless barbarians\
and hopelessly conventional, but that you took the right course. You\
learned to be conventional--learned the rules--before you ventured to\
try to make personal variations in them.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m slow to risk variations,\'94 said I. \'93Most of the efforts in that\
direction are--eccentric. And I detest eccentricity as much as I like\
originality.\'94\
\
\'93If Mr. Beechman were only a little less conventional!\'94 sighed she.\
\'93I\'92m afraid he\'92d be rather--\'94 She hesitated.\
\
\'93Tiresome?\'94 I ventured to suggest.\
\
\'93Tiresome,\'94 she assented. \'93But--there would be the children. Do you\
think he\'92d try to interfere with me there?\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ll never know that until you\'92ve married him,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s a pity he has an occupation that would keep him round the house\
most of the time,\'94 said she. \'93That\'92s a trial to a woman. She\'92s always\
being interrupted when she wishes to be free.\'94\
\
\'93You mustn\'92t expect too much,\'94 said I. \'93I think the children will be\
_your_ children.\'94\
\
She did not reply in words. But a sudden strengthening of her\
expression made me feel that I was getting a glimpse of her father.\
\
We talked no more of Beechman or of any personalities related to this\
story. When the bridge party broke up and a supper was served on deck,\
she and Beechman sat together. And I gathered from the sounds coming\
from their direction that he was making progress. My spirits gradually\
oozed away and I sat glumly pretending to listen while Mrs. Raphael\
talked to me. Usually she interested me because she talked what she\
knew and knew things worth while. But that night I heard scarcely a\
word she said. When the party, one by one, began to go below, Mrs.\
Kirkwood joined me and found an opportunity to say, aside:\
\
\'93Won\'92t you talk with Mr. Beechman--and tell me your honest opinion? You\
know I can\'92t afford to make another mistake. And I\'92m in earnest.\'94\
\
I stood silent, smoking and staring out toward the dim Connecticut\
shore.\
\
\'93It wouldn\'92t be unfair to him,\'94 she urged. \'93You\'92re not especially his\
friend. I can\'92t ask anyone else, and I believe in your judgment.\'94\
\
\'93If I advised you, I\'92d be taking a heavy responsibility,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92m not that kind--you know I\'92m not,\'94 replied she. \'93I don\'92t ask\
advice, to have some one to blame if things go wrong. Of course, if\
there\'92s a reason why you can\'92t very well help me-- Maybe you already\
know something against him?--something you\'92ve no right to tell?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing,\'94 said I, emphatically. \'93And I don\'92t believe there is anything\
against him.\'94 Then, on an impulse of fairness and to wipe out the\
suspicion of Beechman I had unwittingly created, I said: \'93Really,\
there\'92s no reason why I shouldn\'92t size him up and give you my opinion.\
I\'92ll do my best.\'94\
\
She thanked me with a fine lighting up of the eyes. And the warm\
friendly pressure of her hand lingered after she had long been below\
and was no doubt asleep.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
What was my reason for hesitating? You have guessed it, but you think\
I do not intend to admit. You are deceived there. I admit frankly. I\
felt unable to advise her because I found that I was in love with her,\
myself. Yes, I was in love, and for the first time in my life. The\
latest time of falling in love is always the first. As we become older\
and more experienced, better acquainted with the world, with ourselves,\
with what we want and do not want--in a word, as we _grow_, the meaning\
of love grows. And each time we love, we see, as we look back over\
the previous times, that what we thought was love was in fact simply\
educational.\
\
So, when I say I had never loved until I loved Mary Kirkwood, I am\
speaking a truth which is worth thinking about. I had reached the\
age, the stage of physical and mental development, at which a man\'92s\
capacities are at their largest--at which I could give love and could\
appreciate love that was given to me. And I, who could not ask or hope\
love from her, gave her all the love I had to give. Gave because I\
could not help giving. Who, seeing the best, can help wanting it?\
\
But for my promise to her I should have left the yacht early the\
following morning. As it was I stayed on, with my mind made up to keep\
my word. Did I stay because of my promise? Did I stay because I loved\
her? I do not know. Who can fathom the real motive in such a situation\
as that? I can only say that I sought Beechman\'92s society and did my\
best to take his measure. It had been so long my habit to judge men\
without regard to my personal feeling about them that, perhaps in spite\
of myself, I saw this man as he was, not as I should have liked him\
to be. I found that I had underestimated him. I had been prejudiced\
by his taking himself too seriously--a form of vanity which I happen\
particularly to detest. Also his sense of humor was different from\
mine--a fact that had misled me into thinking he had no sense of humor.\
I had thought--shall I say hoped?--that I would find him a man she\
could respect but could not love. I was forced to abandon this idea.\
So far as a man can judge another for a woman, he could succeed with\
almost any heart-free woman. I wondered that Mary Kirkwood should be\
uncertain about him. I might have drawn comfort from her having done\
so, had I not known how she dreaded making a second mistake.\
\
That day and the next, when I was not with him, she was. I shan\'92t\
attempt to tell my emotions. That sort of thing seems absurd to all\
the world but the one who is suffering. Besides, the fact that I was a\
married man would alienate the sympathies of all respectable readers.\
Not that I am yearning for sympathy. Those who have read thus far may\
have possibly gathered that I am not one of those who live on sympathy\
and wither and die without it. The only sympathy human beings seem able\
to give one another, I have discovered, is a species of self-complacent\
pity; and while it may not be exactly a stone, it is certainly a most\
inferior quality of bread.\
\
The third morning I sought her out. She made a picture of strong, slim\
young womanhood to cause the heart--at least, my heart--to ache, as she\
leaned against the rail in her blue-trimmed white linen dress showing\
her lovely throat. Said I, avoiding her eyes: \'93I\'92m off for the shore,\
and I wish to report before leaving.\'94\
\
\'93Ashore!\'94 she cried. \'93Why, you were to have gone on to Bar Harbor and\
back again.\'94\
\
\'93Business--always business.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m disappointed,\'94 said she, and I saw with a furtive glance that her\
face had quite lost its brightness.\
\
\'93I\'92m glad of that, at least,\'94 said I with a successful enough attempt\
at lightness; for, as I have never been the sort of man in whom\
women expect to find sentimentalism, signs of embarrassment or other\
agitation would be attributed to any other source before the heart.\
\
\'93I\'92ve lost interest in the trip,\'94 she declared.\
\
I forced a smile. \'93Beechman isn\'92t going.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, that\'92s different,\'94 said she, with a certain frank impatience.\
\'93You\'92re the one person I can really talk to.... Can\'92t you stay?\'94\
\
I did not let my face betray me. I waited before speaking until I was\
sure of my voice. \'93Impossible,\'94 I said, perhaps rather curtly--for,\
mind you, I wished to deal honestly with her, and was not trying to\
hint my love while pretending to hide it. I know there is a notion\
that love cannot be controlled. But the kind of love that can\'92t be\
controlled is a selfish, greedy appetite and not love at all. When\
the man doesn\'92t control his love the woman may be sure he is thinking\
of himself only, of her merely as a possible means of pleasure--is\
thinking of her as the hungry hunter thinks of the fine fat rabbit.\
Said I:\
\
\'93Now for my report on Beechman.\'94\
\
But she would not let me escape. \'93Why are you short with me?\'94 she\
asked. \'93Have I offended you?\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ve been everything that\'92s kind and friendly.\'94\
\
\'93The very idea of losing your friendship frightens me,\'94 she went on.\
\'93I\'92ve a feeling for you--a feeling of--of intimacy\'94--she flushed\
rosily--\'93that I have for no one else in the world. Oh, I don\'92t expect\
you to return it. No doubt I seem insignificant to you. Almost anyone\
would want your friendship. You are sure you aren\'92t leaving because you\
are bored?\'94\
\
\'93Absolutely sure. If I could explain my reason for going you would see\
that I must. But I can\'92t explain. So you\'92ll be glad to hear that I find\
Beechman even more of a man than I thought.\'94\
\
She looked at me apologetically. \'93You\'92ll think me foolish, but since\
I\'92ve begun to try to like him better I\'92ve been--almost--not liking him.\'94\
\
I am sure I beamed with delight. For, there are limits--very narrow\
ones--to unselfishness in the most considerate love. And I am not\
able to pose as more than feebly unselfish. \'93That isn\'92t fair to him,\'94\
I said, with more enthusiasm in my words than in my tone. \'93I\'92ve been\
judging him as carefully as I know how, and I must in honesty say he is\
a rare man. You\'92ll not find many like him.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t tell me he\'92s worthy,\'94 she cried, \'93or I shall loathe him.\'94\
\
\'93And he cares for you,\'94 I said.\
\
\'93Did he tell you so?\'94\
\
\'93I think he would have if I had encouraged him.... I liked the way he\
spoke of you, and\'94--I hesitated, could not hold back the words--\'93and\
I am not easy to please there.\'94 Those words were certainly far from\
confession, were the mildest form of indiscretion. Still, so determined\
was I to be square, and so guilty did I feel, that they sounded like a\
contemptible attempt stealthily to make love to her.\
\
\'93Thank you,\'94 she said gently. And her suddenly swimming eyes and tender\
voice reminded me how alone she was and how bitter her experience had\
been and how she deserved happiness.\
\
I felt ashamed of myself. \'93I hope you will be happy,\'94 I said, perhaps\
rather huskily. \'93Anyone who tried to prevent it would deserve to be\
killed.\'94\
\
She looked at me with such a steady, penetrating gaze that I feared I\
had betrayed myself. In fact, I knew I had. I glanced at my watch, put\
out my hand. \'93I hate to go,\'94 I said, in the tone of one man to another.\
\'93But I must.\'94 And as we shook hands, I repeated, \'93I know you will be\
happy.\'94\
\
She laughed nervously; she, too, had become ill at ease. \'93You make me\
feel engaged,\'94 she said with an attempt at mockery.\
\
As the launch touched the shore I looked back. She was leaning on the\
rail, Beechman beside her. He was talking, but I felt sure she was not\
listening. As I looked she waved her hand. I lifted my hat and hurried\
away. And I learned the meaning of that word desolation.\
\
Do not think, because I have not raved, talked of the moon and stars,\
poetized about my soul states, that therefore I did not love her. The\
banquet of life spread so richly for me seemed a ghastly mockery. What\
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?\
I had lost my soul. I had discovered how I might have been happy,\
and at the same time I had discovered that it could never be--never.\
And always before me she stood in her radiant youth--intelligent, so\
capable, splendidly sincere--the woman I loved, the woman I felt I\
could have made love me.\
\
There was my temptation--the feeling, the conviction that I could\
win her love. She had confessed to a friendship for me different from\
any she had for anyone else in the world. If I were willing to take\
advantage of her trust, of her liking, of her longing for love and\
of my knowledge of it--if I were to let her see how utterly I loved\
her--I could surely win her. There were times when I said to myself:\
\'93You--even as you are--can make her happier than anyone else could. She\
would prefer what you can give her to what she will get from Beechman.\
Your love gives you the right to make her happy. You are letting\
foolish conventional notions blind you to what is really right. If you\
had acted in business in that fashion, you would not have got far. Yet\
in the supreme crisis of your life you let yourself be frightened off\
by a bogy of conventional morality.\'94\
\
Perhaps I was giving myself sound advice there. I do not know. I\
only know that I put the temptation behind me and went to work. The\
sentimental readers will not forgive me. So be it. I am a plain man,\
rather old-fashioned--prim, I believe it is called--in my ideas, not at\
all the ladies\'92 man. And I did not want to harm her. I loved her.\
\
I went to work. The sort of people who are ever on the lookout for some\
excuse for going to pieces, and the world is well sprinkled with them,\
eagerly seize on disappointment in love as precisely what they were\
seeking. At the risk of being thought cold and hard, I will say that\
it is extremely fortunate for Joan that she escaped the Darby who goes\
smash for disappointed love of her. If Joan had yielded to him, Darby\
would simply have been put to the trouble of finding another pretext\
for throwing up his job and taking to drink. I confess it did not occur\
to me to give up and fall to boozing and brooding. I should not have\
dared do that; for, you see, I was really in love--not with myself, but\
with Mary Kirkwood. I went to work. I filled my days and my evenings\
with business engagements that compelled both my time and my thought.\
I took on an extra secretary. I started to build a railway. I laid out\
an addition to the manufacturing city I had founded. I organized a\
farm for teaching city slum boys to be farmers. I engaged in several\
entirely new mining and manufacturing enterprises. The result was that\
when I went to bed, I slept; and when they awakened me in the morning\
my brain was at work before my head was well off the pillow. And\
still-- You can distract your mind from the aching tooth, but it aches\
on.\
\
All this time I was receiving weekly letters from Edna and Margot--long\
and loving letters. I read them, and you may possibly imagine I was\
filled with shame and remorse. Not at all. My wife and my daughter\
had rather exaggerated my vanity. Only vanity could gull a husband\
and father in my position into fancying himself the object of such\
luxuriant affection as those letters professed. If you have lies to\
tell, take my advice and don\'92t _write_ them. I can\'92t explain the\
mystery, but a lie which, spoken and heard, passes out and passes in\
as smoothly as a greased shuttle in its greased groove, becomes a\
glaring falsehood when set down in black and white. The only effect of\
those letters upon me was to make my sick heart the sadder with the\
realization of what I had missed in losing Mary Kirkwood.\
\
And I kept wondering what it was that Edna and Margot were slathering\
me for.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
In September I got the key to the mystery. The necessity of floating\
some bonds took me abroad again. I found my family ensconced in\
beautiful luxury in an apartment in Paris. You drove out the Champs\
Elys\'e9es. Not far from the President\'92s palace you drove in at great\
doors--not gates, but doors--in a plain, unpretentious-looking house\
wall. You were in a superb garden of whose existence you had no hint\
from the street. Magnificent bronze inner doors--powdered and velveted\
lackeys--a majestic stairway leading to lofty and gorgeous corridors\
and salons. Really my wife, with the aid of those clever European\
professors of the aristocratic art, had educated herself amazingly.\
On every side there were evidences of her good taste in furniture, in\
tapestries, in wall coverings, in pictures. It was not the taste of a\
home maker, but it was unquestionably good taste. It was not the sort\
of taste I liked, but not to admire it would have been to lack the\
sense of harmony in line and color. And let me add in justice to her,\
it was her own taste. There is no mistaking the difference between the\
luxury that is merely bought and the luxury that is created.\
\
I submitted with what grace I could muster to the exuberant hypocrisies\
of that greeting. But I got to business with all speed. \'93In the note\
I found in London you said you had a surprise for me,\'94 I said to Edna.\
\'93What is it?\'94\
\
\'93How impatient you are,\'94 laughed she. \'93Just like a child.\'94\
\
Whether because the fashions of the day happened to be peculiarly\
becoming or because she had actually improved, she now had the\
loveliness more exquisite than I had ever seen in woman. No doubt her\
piquant face had charm for most people; for me it had none whatever.\
I knew too well what lay beneath--or, rather, what was not there, for\
like most human beings her defects of character were not so much the\
presence of the vices as the lack of the virtues.\
\
\'93I\'92ve been waiting for that surprise several months,\'94 said I. \'93Your\
letters and Margot\'92s showed that some shock was coming.\'94\
\
\'93Shock? No, indeed!\'94 And she and Margot laughed gayly. \'93It isn\'92t\
altogether a surprise,\'94 she went on. \'93Can\'92t you guess?\'94\
\
I looked at Margot. \'93Ah!\'94 I said. \'93Margot is engaged.\'94\
\
Margot ran across the room and kissed me. \'93Oh, I\'92m so happy, papa!\'94 she\
cried.\
\
\'93Is it the duke?\'94 I asked.\
\
She made a wry face. \'93He was horrid!\'94 she said. \'93I couldn\'92t _endure_\
him.\'94\
\
\'93So you had to fall back on the marquis?\'94\
\
Neither of the women liked this way of putting the matter. It suggested\
that I knew the painful truth of the failure of the ducal campaign. But\
they were not to be put out of humor. \'93You liked him yourself, papa,\'94\
said Margot.\
\
I was abstractedly thinking how I had no sense of her being my\
daughter or of Edna being my wife. You would say that after all we\
three had been through together, from Passaic up, it would be a sheer\
impossibility for there ever to be a sense of strangeness between us.\
But there is no limit to the power of the human soul to cut itself off;\
intimacy is hard to maintain, isolation--alas--is the natural state.\
I looked on them as strangers; I could feel that, in spite of their\
clever, resolute forcing, in spite of the hypocrisy of love for me\
which each doubtless maintained at all times with the other, still they\
could scarcely hide their feeling that I was a strange man come in from\
the street.\
\
\'93Yes, I liked Crossley,\'94 said I. \'93I think he\'92ll make you a good\
husband.\'94\
\
\'93He is _mad_ about her!\'94 said Edna. \'93There was a while this summer when\
he thought he had lost her, and he all but went out of his mind.\'94\
\
To look at her was to believe it; for, a lovelier girl was never\
displayed in all her physical perfection by a more discriminating\
mother.\
\
\'93When is the wedding to be?\'94 said I.\
\
There was a brief, surcharged silence--no more than a pause. Then Edna\
said indifferently, \'93As soon as the settlements are arranged.\'94\
\
\'93Oh--is he settling something on her?\'94 said I, with pretended\
innocence. \'93I\'92m glad of that. There\'92s been too much of the other sort\
of thing.\'94\
\
Margot came to the rescue with a charming laugh. \'93Poor Hugh!\'94 she said.\
\'93He hasn\'92t anything but mortgages.\'94\
\
\'93Um--I see,\'94 said I glumly--and I observed intense anxiety behind the\
smiles in those two pairs of beautiful eyes. \'93How much have we got to\
pay for him?\'94\
\
Edna looked reproachfully at me. \'93Margot,\'94 said she, \'93you\'92d better go\
tell them to serve lunch in fifteen minutes.\'94\
\
\'93Nonsense,\'94 said I cheerfully. \'93Let her stay. What\'92s the use of this\
hypocrisy? She knows he cares no more about her than she cares about\
him--that it\'92s simply a matter of buying and selling. If she doesn\'92t\
know it, if she\'92s letting her vanity bamboozle her----\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey--please!\'94 implored Edna. \'93Don\'92t smirch the child\'92s romance.\
She and Hugh love each other. If she were poor, he\'92d marry her just the\
same.\'94\
\
\'93Has he offered to go ahead, regardless of settlements?\'94 I asked.\
\
\'93Of course not, papa,\'94 flashed Margot. \'93Things aren\'92t done that way\
over here.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes, they are,\'94 replied I. \'93Romantic love matches occur every day.\
Even royalty throws up its rights, to marry a chorus girl. But when\
there\'92s a fat American goose to pluck and eat, why, they pluck and eat\
it. I\'92m the goose, my dear--not you.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t understand,\'94 murmured Margot.\
\
\'93I wish I didn\'92t,\'94 said I. \'93And I wish you didn\'92t have to understand.\
If possible I want to arrange matters with him so that he\'92ll always\
treat you decently.\'94\
\
\'93But, Godfrey,\'94 cried Edna in a panic, \'93you can\'92t talk money to _him_.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94 said I. \'93He\'92s _thinking_ money. Why shouldn\'92t he talk it?\'94\
\
\'93He knows nothing about those things, papa----\'94\
\
I laughed.\
\
\'93You\'92ll ruin everything!\'94 cried my wife. \'93You\'92ll make us the\
laughingstock of Europe!\'94\
\
\'93We Americans of the rich class are that already,\'94 replied I.\
\
Edna must have given her daughter some secret signal, for she abruptly\
and hastily left the room, closing the door behind her. I shrugged\
my shoulders, settled back on the exquisitely upholstered and carved\
sofa on which I had seated myself. Looking round I said, \'93This is a\
beautiful room. You\'92ve certainly arranged a fitting background for\
yourself and Margot.\'94\
\
But she was not listening. She was watching her fingers slowly twist\
and untwist the delicate little lace handkerchief. At last she said:\
\'93Godfrey, I\'92ve never asked a favor of you. I\'92ve given my whole life to\
advancing your interests--to making our child a perfect lady--and to\
placing her in a dazzling position.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I. \'93You have worked hard--and you\'92ve made your tricks.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve played my hand well--as you have yours,\'94 said she, accepting my\
rather unrefined figure with good grace. \'93I began to make Margot\'92s\
career before she was born. The first time I saw her little face, I\
murmured to myself, \'91Little Duchess.\'92 Now, you understand why I brought\
her up so carefully.\'94\
\
\'93Oh,\'94 said I, looking at her with new interest. \'93That was it?\'94 I who\
knew what a futile, purposeless, easily discouraged breed the human\
race is could not but admire this woman. If her intelligence had only\
been equal to her will, what might she not have accomplished!\
\
\'93I have never lost sight of it for a moment,\'94 said she. \'93In the early\
days--for a time--when we were seemingly so hopelessly obscure, and\
I was too ignorant to learn which way to turn--for a while I was\
discouraged. But I never gave up--never! And step by step I\'92ve trained\
her for the grand position as a leader of European society she was one\
day to occupy--for, I knew that if she led Europe she would be leader\
at home, too. Over there they\'92re merely a feeble, crude echo of Europe.\'94\
\
\'93Socially,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93That\'92s all we\'92re talking about,\'94 replied she. \'93That\'92s all there is\
worth talking about. What else have you been piling up money for?...\
What else?\'94\
\
I could think of no reply. I was silent. What else, indeed?\
\
\'93I kept her away from other children,\'94 Edna went on. \'93After she could\
talk I never trusted her to nurses until we could afford fashionable\
servants. I got her the right sort of governesses--so that she should\
speak French, Italian, and German, and should have a well-bred English\
accent for her own language. I even trained her in the children\'92s\
stories she read--had her read only the fairy tales and the other\
stories that would fill her mind with ideas of nobility and titles and\
the high things of life.\'94\
\
\'93The high things of life,\'94 said I.\
\
She made an impressive gesture--she looked like a beautiful young\
empress. \'93Let\'92s not cant,\'94 said she. \'93Those _are_ the high things\
of life. Ask any person you meet in America--young or old, high or\
low--ask him which he\'92d rather be--a prince, duke, marquis, or a saint,\
scientist, statesman. What would he answer?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93That he\'92d rather be a millionaire,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93A millionaire with a title--with established social position at the\
very top--that couldn\'92t be taken away. That\'92s the truth, Godfrey.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll not contradict you,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93And,\'94 she went on, \'93I\'92ve brought up our daughter so that she could\
realize the highest ambition within our reach. Haven\'92t I brought her up\
well?\'94\
\
\'93Perfectly, for the purpose,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93When we came over here, I examined the ground carefully. I was at\
first inclined to one of the big Continental titles. They are much\
older, much more high sounding than the English titles--and so far as\
birth goes they mean something, while the English titles mean really\
nothing at all. The English aristocracy isn\'92t an aristocracy of birth.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s, no doubt, the reason why it still has some say in affairs,\'94\
said I.\
\
\'93Its talk about birth is almost entirely sham,\'94 proceeded she, not\
interested in my irrelevant comment. \'93But I found that it was the most\
substantial aristocracy, the only one that was respected everywhere,\
just as the English money circulates everywhere. And it\'92s the only\
one that makes much of an impression at home. We are so ignorant that\
we think England is all that it pretends to be--the powerful part of\
Europe. Of course, it isn\'92t, but--no matter. I decided for an English\
title.\'94\
\
\'93And Margot?\'94\
\
\'93I have brought her up to respect my judgment,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93I wonder what will become of her,\'94 said I, reflectively, \'93when she\
hasn\'92t you at her elbow to tell her what to do.... But why a marquis?\
Why not a duke?\'94\
\
She smiled, blushed a little. \'93The only duke we could have got--and he\
was a nice young fellow--but he was in love with an English girl of\
wealth--and he wanted too much to change to an American. Is that frank\
enough to suit you?\'94\
\
\'93If you\'92d only keep to that key,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93He wanted double the American dowry that he was willing to take with\
an English girl.\'94\
\
\'93His being in love with another girl might have made it unpleasant for\
Margot,\'94 I suggested.\
\
\'93That wouldn\'92t have amounted to anything,\'94 replied she. \'93Over here the\
right sort of people bring up their children as I brought up Margot--to\
give their hearts where their hands should go. They are not shallow and\
selfish. They think of the family dignity and honor before they think\
of their personal feelings.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s interesting--and new--at least to me,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You have been judging these things without knowing, Godfrey,\'94 said\
she. \'93You have attacked me for narrowness, when in fact you were the\
narrow one.\'94\
\
\'93Yes? What next?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I found that the Massingfords--that\'92s the family name of the Marquis\
of Crossley--I found they ranked higher as a family than any of the\
ducal families except one. Of course I don\'92t include the royal dukes.\'94\
\
\'93Of course not,\'94 said I gravely.\
\
\'93I might possibly have got one of the royal dukes--if not in England,\
then here on the Continent. But I decided-- You see, Godfrey, I looked\
into everything.\'94\
\
\'93You certainly have been thorough,\'94 said I. \'93I should have said it was\
impossible in so short a time.\'94\
\
\'93But it wasn\'92t difficult. All the Americans over here are well informed\
about these things.\'94\
\
\'93I can readily believe it,\'94 said I. \'93But why did you turn down the poor\
royal dukes?\'94\
\
\'93Because the other women would have made it dreadfully uncomfortable\
for Margot. They\'92d have hated her for taking precedence over them by\
such a long distance. Then, too--the dowry. I was afraid you couldn\'92t\
afford the dowry--or wouldn\'92t think the title worth the money. Indeed,\
I didn\'92t think so, myself.\'94\
\
\'93A royal duke comes high?\'94\
\
\'93The least dowry would be seventy-five million francs.\'94\
\
\'93Fifteen million dollars!\'94 I exclaimed. \'93Whew!\'94\
\
\'93Mrs. Sinkers tried to get one for her daughter for ten millions--all\
she could scrape together. They agreed to a morganatic marriage for\
that, but not a full marriage. So, she and poor Martha gave it up.\
Martha\'92s heart is broken. The duke made love to her so wonderfully. I\
can\'92t imagine what Mrs. Sinkers was about, to allow such a thing before\
the affair was settled. Poor Martha was so excited that she would have\
accepted the morganatic marriage--she ranking merely as the duke\'92s\
head mistress. But while he was willing to take other mistresses for\
nothing, and even to pay them, he wouldn\'92t take _her_ for less than\
fifty million francs.\'94\
\
\'93Poor Martha!\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I was too wise to trifle with royal dukes,\'94 pursued Edna, so\
interested in her own narrative and so eager to show how sagacious she\
had been that she forgot her pose and her doubts as to my sympathies.\
\'93I weighed the advantages and disadvantages of about a dozen eligible\
men. Only three stood the test, and it finally narrowed down to\
Crossley. Margot was so happy when I told her. She wanted to love\
him--and now she is loving him.\'94\
\
A long pause while Edna calmed down to earth from her European\
soarings, and while I, too, returned to the normal from an excursion in\
the opposite direction. \'93How much does he want?\'94 said I. \'93Let\'92s get to\
bed rock.\'94\
\
\'93He loves her so that he is willing, so I hear-- Of course, nothing has\
been said-- You will not believe how refined and----\'94\
\
\'93How much?\'94 interrupted I.\
\
Edna winced at my rudeness, then again presented an unruffled front of\
happy loving serenity. \'93Enough to pay off the mortgages and to provide\
them with a suitable income.\'94\
\
\'93How much?\'94 I persisted, laughing.\
\
She looked tenderly remonstrant. \'93I don\'92t know, Godfrey----\'94\
\
\'93You know _about_ how much. What\'92s the figure--the price of this marked\
down marquis?\'94\
\
\'93I should say the whole thing would not cost more than three or four\
million dollars.\'94\
\
\'93Three--or four.\'94 I laughed aloud. \'93Not much difference there. Now\
which is it--three or four?\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps nearer four. Margot must have a _good_ income.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93The whole object would be defeated if she hadn\'92t the means----\'94\
\
\'93The money,\'94 I suggested. \'93Why use these evasive words? We\'92re talking a\
plain subject. Let\'92s use its language.\'94\
\
\'93The money, then,\'94 acquiesced she, resolutely good-humored. \'93If she\
hadn\'92t the money to make a proper appearance.\'94\
\
\'93Naturally, to lead in society you must lead in spending money....\
Well--it can\'92t be done.\'94\
\
She paled, half started from her chair, sank back again. There was a\
long silence. Then she said, \'93You have never been cruel, Godfrey. You\
won\'92t be cruel now. You won\'92t destroy my life work. You won\'92t shatter\
Margot\'92s happiness.\'94\
\
\'93The whole thing is--is nauseating to me,\'94 said I.\
\
Her short, pretty upper lip quivered. Her eyes filled. \'93If you didn\'92t\
approve, dear, why didn\'92t you stop me long ago? Why did you let me go\
on until there was no turning back?\'94\
\
I was silent. There seemed to be no answer to that.\
\
\'93Did you do it purposely, Godfrey?\'94 said she, with melancholy eyes upon\
me. \'93Did you lure us on, so that you could crush us at one stroke?\'94\
\
I was silent.\
\
\'93I can\'92t believe that of you. I won\'92t believe it until you compel me\
to.\'94\
\
\'93As I understand it,\'94 said I, \'93you propose that I hand over to this\
young man four million----\'94\
\
\'93Only about half of it, Godfrey,\'94 cried she, reviving. \'93The other half\
would be Margot\'92s--for her own income.\'94\
\
\'93Then that I hand over to this amiable, insignificant young foreigner\
two million dollars to induce him to consent to the degradation of\
marrying my daughter--to have him going about, saying in effect, \'91It is\
true, she is only one of those low Americans, but don\'92t forget that I\
got two million dollars for stooping.\'92 Is that the proposition?\'94\
\
\'93You know it isn\'92t!\'94 cried she. \'93He doesn\'92t feel that he is degrading\
himself. He feels proud of winning her--the most beautiful, the best\
mannered girl in London. But it\'92d be simply impossible for them to\
marry without the money. _I_ shouldn\'92t want it. They would be wretched.\
You talk like a sentimental schoolboy, Godfrey. How could two refined,\
sensitive people such as Hugh and Margot, used to every luxury, used\
to being foremost in society--how could they be happy without the\
means----\'94\
\
\'93The money,\'94 I corrected blandly.\
\
\'93Without the money needed to maintain their position as marquis and\
marchioness of Crossley?\'94\
\
I nodded assent.\
\
\'93He has only about five thousand--twenty-five thousand of our money--a\
year. That is ridiculous for a marquis. He has to keep all his houses\
closed and run as economically as possible. Even then they cost him\
nearly seventy-five thousand dollars a year to maintain.\'94\
\
\'93And he has only twenty-five thousand!\'94\
\
\'93I meant twenty-five thousand over and above. He has that to live on.\
And, poor fellow, he is dropping every year deeper and deeper into\
debt. So much is expected of a marquis.\'94\
\
\'93But not honesty, apparently,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You mustn\'92t judge these people by our commercial standards,\'94 she\
gently rebuked.\
\
\'93I forgot,\'94 said I penitently.\
\
\'93And the poor fellow does love Margot so!\'94\
\
\'93Um,\'94 said I. \'93Have you ever happened to hear of a Miss Townley--Jupey\
Townley?\'94\
\
A flash of annoyance flitted over Edna\'92s lovely, delicate countenance.\
\
\'93I see you have,\'94 said I. \'93You were, indeed, thorough. Permit me to\
compliment you, my dear.\'94\
\
\'93I am glad Hugh hasn\'92t been a saint.\'94\
\
\'93Isn\'92t,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93That\'92s all in the past,\'94 declared she.\
\
\'93I saw them in a box at a London music hall night before last,\'94 said I.\
\'93They were-- They had been drinking.\'94\
\
But Edna was not daunted. \'93You are a man of the world, Godfrey. Don\'92t\
pretend to be narrow.\'94\
\
\'93When a man loves a woman----\'94\
\
\'93Love is very different from that sort of thing, and you know it.\'94\
\
\'93Has Margot heard----\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey!\'94 cried Edna, in horror. \'93Do you think I would permit _my_\
daughter--_our_ daughter--to know such things! Why, her mind is as\
pure----\'94\
\
I could not restrain a gesture of disgust. \'93You women!\'94 I cried,\
rising. \'93Pure! Pure--God in Heaven, pure!\'94\
\
Her look of dazed astonishment, obviously sincere, helped me to get\
back my composure. I sat down again. \'93I beg your pardon,\'94 I said. \'93I\
didn\'92t mean to interrupt.\'94\
\
\'93Even if you men have no purity yourselves, you ought to believe in it\
in women,\'94 said she, with an injured air.\
\
\'93Yes, indeed,\'94 I agreed heartily. \'93I congratulate you on being able to\
make such generous allowances for masculine frailty.\'94\
\
\'93You are sarcastic,\'94 said she coldly.\
\
\'93No matter. It certainly does not damage the title--perhaps adds to its\
luster.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s hereditary in their family to be wild up to marriage, and then to\
settle down and serve the state in some distinguished position.\'94\
\
\'93Oh--in that case--\'94 said I ironically.\
\
\'93Margot and her husband and her children will have your money some\
day,\'94 pursued she. \'93Why not give it to her now, when it will get her\
happiness?\'94\
\
That impressed me. \'93I have not said I would not consent to this\
marriage,\'94 I reminded her. \'93As a matter of fact, I\'92m in favor of it. I\
can see no future for Margot in America----\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 cried Edna eagerly. \'93She simply couldn\'92t marry over\
there. She\'92d be wretched.\'94\
\
\'93But I feel it is my duty-- Rather late in the day for me to talk about\
duty toward my daughter, after neglecting it all these years. Still, I\
ought to see to it that she has the best possible chance for a smooth\
married life. It\'92s only common prudence to take all precautions--isn\'92t\
it?\'94\
\
\'93All _sensible_ precautions,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93You know how many of these foreign \'91alliances,\'92 as they\'92re called,\
have turned out badly.\'94\
\
\'93They get a good many divorces in the states,\'94 she suggested smilingly.\
\'93One to every twelve marriages, I read the other day.\'94\
\
I admitted that she had made an effective retort. \'93The truth is,\'94 said\
I, \'93American women aren\'92t brought up for domestic life. So, whether\
they marry at home or abroad they have trouble.\'94\
\
\'93Men resent their independence,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93It may be so,\'94 said I. Of what use to point out to her that the\
trouble lay in the women\'92s demanding to be supported and refusing to\
do anything to earn their support? All I said was: \'93I suspect a good\
many husbands think the marriage contract too one-sided--binding only\
them and not their wives. But the trouble with the \'91alliances\'92 can\'92t be\
that.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s because Europeans look on the wife as a kind of head servant. But\
Hugh isn\'92t that sort.\'94\
\
\'93We\'92ll know more as to that when we hear what Margot says after she\'92s\
been married a few years,\'94 said I. \'93The point to settle now is how to\
bind him to good behavior so far as it can be done in advance. He may\
be deeply in love with Margot. He may stay in love with her. But in\
the circumstances it\'92s wise to assume that he wants only her money and\
that, if he gets it, he\'92ll treat her badly.\'94\
\
My wife\'92s silence was encouraging.\
\
\'93If he had plenty of money he might even goad her into releasing\
him--and might marry again.\'94\
\
My wife was obviously impressed. \'93Yes--that has been done,\'94 said she.\
\'93Of course, if Margot should have an heir right away. But----\'94\
\
She looked at me as if trying to decide whether she could trust me with\
a confidence. She evidently decided in my favor, for she went on to say:\
\
\'93On the other hand--Margot is a peculiar girl. No--many women have the\
same peculiarity. They can\'92t be trusted with power over their husbands.\
If she had all the money in her own name and he were dependent on\
her-- Godfrey, I\'92m sure there\'92d be trouble.\'94\
\
Once more she was astonishing me with her clear judgment in matters\
as to which I should have thought her hopelessly prejudiced. \'93But _I_\
can be trusted,\'94 said I. \'93The plan I had in mind was to take over the\
mortgages and guarantee a sufficient income.\'94\
\
She shook her head. \'93He won\'92t consent,\'94 said she. \'93His solicitors will\
insist on better terms than that.\'94\
\
\'93Now you see why I want to talk to him directly. I don\'92t purpose to be\
hampered by that old trick of the principal hidden behind a go-between.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s no other way,\'94 said Edna. \'93They\'92re too clever to yield that.\'94\
\
\'93He needs money badly.\'94\
\
\'93But he won\'92t marry unless he\'92s actually to get it,\'94 replied she.\
\'93Almost every American who has married a daughter over here has\
tried to make a business bargain--at least, a bargain not altogether\
one-sided. Not one of them has succeeded. These Europeans have been\
handling the dowry and settlement question too many centuries.\'94\
\
\'93I see,\'94 said I affably. \'93If we want what they\'92ve got, we have to take\
it on their terms.\'94\
\
It was most satisfactory, talking with her now that she consented to\
speak and listen to good sense. I was at once in a more amiable frame\
of mind, although I knew she had descended from her high horse only\
because she was shrewd enough to see it was the one way to get me to do\
as she wished.\
\
\'93I will hide behind a go-between myself,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Any English lawyer would simply play into the hands of the other side.\
At least, so Hilda was telling me.\'94\
\
\'93Is she happy?\'94\
\
\'93Very.\'94\
\
\'93When\'92s her husband coming back?\'94\
\
\'93Not for a year or so, I believe. Lord Blankenship cares more for big\
game and for exploring than for anything else.\'94\
\
\'93An ideal marriage,\'94 said I. \'93She brought him the money he wanted. He\
brought her the title she wanted. And they don\'92t annoy each other. He\
devotes himself to sport, she to society. These aristocratic people,\
with their simple, vulgar wants that are so easily gratified--how they\
are to be envied!\'94\
\
Edna was observing me furtively, uneasily. I pretended not to notice.\
I went on: \'93Now, if they wanted the difficult things--things like love\
and companionship and congeniality--they might be wretched. When a\
child cries for a stick of candy or a tinsel-covered rattle--for money\
or social position--why, it\'92s easily pacified. But if it cries for the\
moon and the stars--\'94 I laughed softly, enjoying her wonder as much as\
my own fancies.\
\
After a while she said, with some constraint: \'93You see a great deal of\
Armitage?\'94\
\
\'93We console each other,\'94 said I, with mild raillery.\
\
\'93Have you been going out much?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m very busy.\'94\
\
\'93In one of your letters-- Those rare little notes of yours! You are\
cruelly neglectful, Godfrey-- In one of them you spoke of a week end\
or so on Armitage\'92s yacht. You and he don\'92t go off alone?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no. Some literary and artistic people usually are aboard.\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t know you cared for that sort.\'94\
\
\'93They\'92re interesting enough.\'94\
\
\'93I suppose they\'92re friends of Mrs. Kirkwood\'92s,\'94 pursued Edna. \'93She\'92s\
like her brother--affects to despise fashionable society. Their\
pretenses always amused me.\'94\
\
\'93They are sincere people,\'94 said I. \'93They don\'92t pretend. That\'92s why I\
like them.\'94\
\
\'93I notice that Armitage belongs to every fashionable club in New\
York--and to some over here,\'94 said Edna with a smile that was as shrewd\
as her observation. \'93Also, that he manages to find time to appear at\
the most exclusive parties during the season.\'94\
\
I had observed this same peculiarity. While I refused to draw from it\
the inference she drew--and was undeniably justified in drawing--I had\
been tempted to do so. It irritated me to see her finger upon the weak\
spot in Armitage\'92s profession of freedom from snobbishness.\
\
\'93And Mary Kirkwood,\'94 pursued Edna, \'93she\'92s the same sort of fakir. Only,\
being a woman, she does it more deceptively than he.\'94\
\
\'93She goes nowhere,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But she revels in the fact that she _could_ go anywhere. So, she\
fooled you--did she?\'94 Edna laughed merrily at my ill-concealed\
discomfiture. \'93But then you know so little about women.\'94\
\
\'93I confess I\'92ve never seen in her the least sign of snobbishness or\
of interest in fashionable foolishness,\'94 said I, with what I flatter\
myself was a fair attempt at the impartial air.\
\
\'93That in itself ought to have opened your eyes,\'94 said Edna. \'93Whenever\
you see anyone, dear, with no sign of a weakness that everybody in the\
world has, you may be sure you are seeing a fraud.\'94\
\
\'93Because _you_ have a weakness, dear,\'94 said I--as pleasant and as acid\
as she, \'93you must not imagine it is universal.\'94\
\
\'93But _you_ have that weakness, too.\'94\
\
\'93Really?\'94\
\
\'93Did you or did you not join the fashionable clubs Armitage put you up\
at?\'94\
\
I had to laugh at myself.\
\
\'93Are you or are you not proud of the fact that your best friend,\
Armitage, is a fashionable person? Would you be as proud of him if he\
were only welcome in middle-class houses?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m ashamed to say there\'92s something in that,\'94 said I. \'93Not much, but\
something.\'94\
\
\'93Yet you believed Mary Kirkwood!\'94 ended Edna.\
\
\'93I thought little about it,\'94 said I. \'93And I still believe that she is\
sincere--that she has no snobbishness in her.\'94\
\
\'93You like her?\'94\
\
\'93So far as I know her--yes.\'94 My answer was an attempt to meet and\
parry a suspicion I felt in Edna\'92s mind. And it was fairly successful;\
fairly--for no one ever yet completely dislodged a suspicion. We\
cannot see into each other\'92s minds. We know, from what is going on in\
our own minds, that the human mind is capable of any vagary. Once we\
have applied this general principle to a specific person, once we have\
become definitely aware that there are in that person\'92s mind things of\
which we have no knowledge--from that time forth suspicion of them is\
in us, and is ready to grow, to flourish.\
\
I had no difficulty in shifting to the subject of the marriage. \'93I\'92ll\
cable for my lawyer,\'94 said I. \'93If anyone can beat this game, Fred\
Norman can.\'94\
\
\'93Yes--send for him,\'94 said Edna. \'93He is canny--and a man of _our_ world.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m going back to London to-night--\'94 I went on.\
\
\'93To-night!\'94 she exclaimed. Her eyes filled with tears. \'93Godfrey--is\
this treating us right?\'94\
\
I looked at her intently. \'93Don\'92t fake with me,\'94 said I quietly. \'93It\
isn\'92t necessary.\'94\
\
\'93What _do_ you mean?\'94 cried she.\
\
\'93I mean, I understand perfectly that you care nothing about me,\
except as the source of the money you need in amusing yourself. As\
you see in my manner, I am not wildly agitated by that fact. So far\
as I\'92m concerned, there\'92s no reason why we should make each other\
uncomfortable.\'94\
\
\'93What _is_ the matter with you, Godfrey?\'94 she said, with large widening\
eyes gazing at me. \'93You have changed entirely.\'94\
\
\'93As you have,\'94 said I, admiring her shrewdness, and afraid of it.\
\'93You\'92ve been educating. So have I. Mine has been slower than yours and\
along different lines. But it, too, has been thorough.\'94\
\
She was not satisfied, though I\'92m confident my tone and manner betrayed\
nothing. Said she: \'93Some bad woman has been poisoning you against\
Margot and me.\'94\
\
\'93As you please,\'94 said I, too wary to be drawn into that discussion.\
I realized I had said entirely too much. Relying upon her intense\
vanity, her profound belief in her power over me, I had gone too far.\
\'93My business takes me to London to-night. I\'92ll probably be there until\
Norman arrives. Then we\'92ll come over.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t you want us in London with you?\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93You are comfortably settled here,\'94 replied I. \'93Why disturb yourselves?\'94\
\
She knew how to read me. She saw I was not in a dangerous mood, as\
she had begun to fear. She said: \'93We _did_ intend to stay in Paris a\
month or six weeks. We have a charming circle of friends among the\
old families here. I wish you\'92d stop on, Godfrey. The people are\
attractive, and the social life is most interesting.\'94\
\
\'93Not to me,\'94 said I. \'93You forget I\'92m a Hooligan. Besides, you don\'92t\
need me. There\'92s your advantage through being young and lovely and\
rich. You can get plenty of men to escort you about. It\'92s only the old\
and ugly married women who really need their husbands. Well--I\'92ll be\
ready when you are forced to fall back on me. Nothing like having in\
reserve a faithful Dobbin.\'94\
\
She looked hurt. \'93How _can_ you joke about sacred things,\'94 she\
reproached.\
\
I laughed her seriousness aside. \'93Yes, I\'92ll be waiting, ready to be\
your companion, the confidant of your rheumatism and gout, when all the\
others have fled. Meanwhile, my dear, I\'92ll have my frisk.\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey!\'94\
\
It amused me to see how bitter to her was the taste of the medicine she\
had been forcing upon me so self-complacently. It amused me to watch\
the confusion into which these new and unsuspected aspects of myself\
was throwing her.\
\
Said I: \'93I\'92m glad you\'92re as generous toward me as I\'92ve been toward you.\
That\'92s why we\'92ve avoided the Armitage sort of smash-up.\'94\
\
When I left Paris that night I\'92ll engage she was thinking about me as\
she had never thought in her whole self-centered, American-female life.\
\
\
\
\
VIII\
\
\
My cable to Norman was answered the next day but one by a note from\
him, stopping in the same hotel. I shall not detail the negotiations\
that followed--the long and stormy scenes between him and Dawkins,\
solicitor to the Marquis of Crossley. It is sufficient to say that\
Norman had the novel sensation of being beaten on every point. Not\
outwitted, for he had wit enough and to spare for any contest of\
cunning; but beaten by the centuries-old precedents and customs and\
requirements in matters of dower and settlement. The mercenary marriage\
is an ancient habit of the human race; in fact, the scientists have\
proved that it began with marriage itself, that there was no marriage\
in the civilized sense until there was property to marry for. Perhaps\
the mercenary marriage is not so recent in America as our idyllists\
declare. Do we not read that the father of his country married solely\
for money an almost feeble-minded woman whom everybody knew he did\
not love? And, inasmuch as marriage is first of all a business--the\
business of providing for the material needs and wants of two and\
their children--may it not barely be possible that the unqualifiedly\
sentimental view of marriage can be--perhaps has been--overdone? In\
America, where the marriage for sentiment prevails to an extent unknown\
anywhere else in the world--is not the institution of marriage there\
in its most uneasy state? And may not that be the reason?\
\
What a world of twaddle it is! If men and women could only learn to\
build their ideals on the firm foundation--the only firm foundation--of\
the practical instead of upon the quicksand of lies and pretenses,\
wouldn\'92t the tower climb less shakily, if more slowly, toward the stars?\
\
You may be sure there was nothing of the stars in those talks between\
Norman and Dawkins--or in my talks with Norman--or in Crossley\'92s talks\
with Dawkins. Crossley had had me looked up--had discovered as much\
about my finances as it is possible to discover about the private\
business of an American. He had got the usual exaggerated estimate of\
my wealth, and he was resolved that he would not be cheated of a single\
dollar he might wring from me. From my standpoint it was obvious that\
he and Margot must have plenty of money or they could not be happy.\
All I desired was to prevent him from feeling financially free--and\
therefore under the aristocratic code, morally free--to show and to\
act, after marriage, the contempt I knew he felt for all things and\
persons American--except the dollars, which could be exchanged into\
sovereigns. I fought hard, but he stood fast. Either Margot must lose\
him or I must give him about what he asked--a fortune in his own right\
for him. If I choose I could dower her; but as to dowering him he would\
not permit the question of alternative to be raised.\
\
\'93All right,\'94 said I at last to Norman. \'93Give them their minimum.\'94\
\
He was astounded, was furious--and as he is not the ordinary\
lick-spittle lawyer but a man of arrogant independence, he did not\
hesitate to let me see that his anger--and scorn--were for myself. \'93Do\
you mean that?\'94 he said.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 replied I carelessly--as if I were now indifferent about the\
whole business. \'93My girl wants his title. And why let a question of\
money come between her and happiness?\'94\
\
\'93I can\'92t refrain from saying, Loring, that I\'92d not have believed this\
of you.\'94\
\
\'93She\'92s not fit to live in America,\'94 said I. \'93Her mother hasn\'92t educated\
her for it. American mothers don\'92t educate their daughters nowadays to\
be wives of American men. Honestly, do you know an American man able to\
do for himself who would be foolish enough to marry that sort of girl?\'94\
\
His silence was assent.\
\
\'93You see. I\'92ve got to buy her a husband--that is, a title--over here.\
This offering seems as good as there is in the market--at the price.\
So--why not?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s one view of it,\'94 said he coldly.\
\
I laid my hand on his shoulder. \'93Come now--be sensible,\'94 said I. \'93What\
else can I do?\'94\
\
\'93It would be an impertinence for me to say,\'94 replied he.\
\
\'93I can guess,\'94 said I. \'93You needn\'92t trouble yourself to say it. You\
evidently don\'92t know the circumstances. And I may add that so long as\
I\'92ve got to buy Margot a title I might as well buy her a good one.\'94\
\
He eyed me sharply. But I did not take him into my confidence--nor\
shall I confide in you at present, gentle reader. I did not even let\
him see that I was holding back anything. I went on with good-humored\
raillery:\
\
\'93I\'92m doing better than Hanley or Vanderveld or Pattison or any of the\
others who\'92ve dealt in these markets. For a marquis Crossley is selling\
cheap. He\'92s far from penniless, you know. It\'92s simply that he wants\
more money. Why, really, old man, it\'92s what\'92s called a love match. They\
always call it a love match when the nobleman isn\'92t absolutely on his\
uppers.\'94\
\
\'93You are certainly a philosopher, Loring,\'94 said Norman, anxious, I saw,\
to finish and drop the affair.\
\
\'93And I became one in the usual way--necessity,\'94 said I. \'93I\'92m as eager\
to have this thing dispatched as you are. I want to get out to sea,\
where perhaps the stench of aristocracy will blow out of my nostrils,\
and stay out of them till I reach the other shore. Then I\'92ll get it\
again. It blows down the bay to meet the incoming ships.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, we\'92re pretty bad,\'94 admitted Norman. \'93Not so bad as we used to\
be, but pretty bad.\'94 He laughed. \'93They accuse us of loving money. Why,\
we are mere beginners at it. We haven\'92t learned how to idle or how to\
spend money except in crude, tiresome ways. And to love money deeply\
you must know how to idle and how to spend. Money\'92s _the_ passion with\
these people. How they do need it!\'94\
\
Neither shall I linger over the details of the engagement and the\
wedding. For all that was important about either I refer you to\
the newspapers of London and New York. They gave everything that\
makes a snob\'92s eyes glisten and a snob\'92s mouth water. My wife has\
somewhere--she knows exactly where--a scrapbook, and my daughter has\
another of the same kind. Those scrapbooks are strongly bound and the\
pages are of the heaviest time- and wear-resisting paper. In them are\
pasted columns on columns of lists of titles, of descriptions of jewels\
and dresses, of enumerations of wedding gifts. Margot received things\
costing small fortunes from people she barely knew well enough to\
invite. They gave in the hope--the good hope--of gaining the valuable\
favor of the Marchioness of Crossley, a great lady by reason of her\
title, a greater lady by reason of the ancientness of the Massingford\
family, and at the top and summit of greatness by reason of her wealth.\
\
That last item, by the way, was vastly overestimated. Everyone assumed\
that Crossley had sold much more dearly. No one but those intimately\
concerned dreamed what a bargain I had got.\
\
You may be picturing a sordid affair, redolent of the stenches of\
commercialism. If you are, gentle reader, you are showing yourself\
unworthy of your own soulfulness, unworthy of the elegant society\
into which I have introduced you. I have been giving simply the plain\
facts--a mere skeleton upon which you, versed in society columns\
and society novels, and skilled in the art of hiding ugly truths\
under pretty lies, may readily drape the flesh and the garments of\
sentimentality and snobbishness. You will then have the truth as it\
appeared to the world--a handsome, manly groom, every inch of him\
the patrician; a wondrous lovely, innocent, pure young bride, looking\
the worthy mate of the great noble she had won with her beauty and\
her sweetness; a background of magnificent houses and equipages,\
of grand society people, of lackeys in livery without number; an\
atmosphere of luxury, refinement, perfumed with the fairest flowers\
and the most delicate artificial scents. You are seeing also the high\
and noble motives of all concerned--the joy of parents in a daughter\
sentimentally wooed and won to happiness; the generous and kindly\
feelings of all the friends; the lavish and affectionate overflowing of\
costly gifts; above all, the ecstatic young couple wrapped up in their\
love for each other. Flesh up and beautify the skeleton to your taste,\
gentle reader. You will not go amiss.\
\
I must linger a moment on the happiness of my daughter. It was too\
spiritual to be of this earth. As soon as the miserable, unimportant\
money matters were settled, and her mother gave her full leave to love,\
she threw herself into it with all the ardor of the heroine of a novel.\
She had two diamond hearts made--at the most fashionable jewelers in\
Paris, you may be sure. Upon the inside of the one she kept she had\
engraved, under his picture, \'93From Hugh to Margot.\'94 In the one she gave\
him there surrounded her picture in diamond inlay, \'93To Hugh from his\
dear love Margot.\'94\
\
Each was to wear the heart round the neck until death. Again and again\
I caught her dreaming over hers, sometimes with tears in her limpid\
eyes. Again and again I caught her scribbling, \'93Margot, Marchioness\
of Crossley, Viscountess Brear, Countess of Felday and Noth, Baroness\
de Selve,\'94 and so on through a list of titles which gentle reader will\
find in \'93Burke\'92s\'94 and the \'93Almanach de Gotha.\'94\
\
And she had a reverent way of looking at him and a tender way of\
touching him. Her mother, you will believe, spared neither expense nor\
pains in getting together the trousseau. But Margot was not satisfied.\
\'93Not nearly fine enough for _his_ bride,\'94 she would say. \'93I\'92m _so_\
afraid he\'92ll be disappointed.\'94 Then the tears would spring. \'93Oh, mamma!\
If he should be disappointed in me!\'94\
\
\'93Not so bad as if you were to be disappointed in him,\'94 I put in with no\
other motive than to cheer her up.\
\
But it only shocked her. \'93In Hugh!\'94 she exclaimed, meaning in Cecil\
Robert Grunleigh Percival Hugh Massingford, Marquis of Crossley, etc.\
\'93_I_ disappointed in _him_! Oh, papa! You don\'92t _realize_!\'94\
\
\'93No, I suppose not,\'94 said I, getting myself away as speedily as my legs\
would carry me.\
\
Through these joyous scenes of youth and love and luxury I moved\
gloomily--restless, bitter, tormented by self-reproaches and by\
thoughts of the woman I loved. What Edna had said about her, though\
I knew it was by way of precautionary cattishness, put into my mind\
the inevitable suspicion--no, not actual suspicion, but germ of\
suspicion--the almost harmless germ from which the most poisonous\
suspicions may develop. I went round and round my mental image of Mary\
Kirkwood. I viewed it from all angles. But I could not find a trace of\
the flaw Edna had asserted. I analyzed her with all the analytical\
skill I possessed, and that, I flatter myself, is not a little. No one\
who has not the faculty of analysis ever gets anywhere; no one who has\
that faculty ever escapes the charge of cynicism. Shallow people--the\
sort that make such a charge--will regard it as proof of my utter\
cynicism, my absolute lack of sentiment, that I was able to analyze the\
woman I loved, or pretended I loved. But I assure you, gentle reader,\
that not even love and passion suspend the habitual processes of a\
good mind. The reason you have read the contrary so often is because\
precious few writers about men of the superior sort have the capacity\
to comprehend the intellects they try to picture. To the man of large\
affairs, the average--and many a one above the average--biography or\
novel about a great man reads like the attempt of a straddle bug to\
give his fellow straddle bugs an account of an elephant.\
\
I was the only inharmonious figure in that round of festivals. But no\
one observed me. I simply got the reputation of being a man of reserve,\
a thinker rather than a talker--as if there ever lived a thinker\
who did not overflow with torrents of talk like a spring fed from a\
glacier; but, of course, the spring flows only when The conditions\
are favorable, not when it is ice-bound. I was not even interested in\
observing. There is a monotony about the actions of fashionable people\
that soon reduces a spectator of agile mind to stupor. The same thing\
over and over again, with variations so slight that only a nit-wit\
would be interested in them-- Could there be a worse indictment of\
the intelligence of the human race than that so large a part of its\
presumably most intelligent classes engage in the social farce, which\
is an example of aimless activity about on a level with a dog\'92s chasing\
its own tail?\
\
But Edna----\
\
As I look back on those weeks of days, each one crowded like a ragbag\
with rubbish, the figure of Edna stands out radiant. You would never\
have thought her the mother of the bride--or, indeed, a mother at all.\
A woman who for many years leads a virginal or almost virginal life\
gets back the vestal air of the unmarried girl. This air had returned\
to Edna. She had it as markedly as had Margot. It was most becoming\
to her piquant style of beauty, giving it the allure of the height\
that invites ascent and capture, yet has never been desecrated. And\
how she did enjoy the grandeur--the great names, the gorgeous presents\
of curiously and costlily wrought gold and silver and crystal, and\
precious stones, the succession of panoramas of ultra-fashionable life,\
with herself and Margot always the center.\
\
I used to stand aside and watch her and feel as if I were hypnotized\
into vivid hallucinations. I recalled the incidents of our early\
life--Brooklyn, the Passaic flat, the squat and squalid homes of our\
childhood. I recalled our people--hers and mine--tucked away in homely\
obscurity among the New Jersey hills. But by no effort of mind could I\
associate her with these realities. She had literally been born again.\
I looked at the other Americans of humble beginnings--and there were\
not a few of them in that society. All had retained some traces of\
their origin, had some characteristics that made it not difficult to\
connect their present with their past. But not Edna.\
\
At the wedding--in the most fashionable church in the West End--Margot\
looked weary and rather old, gone slightly stale from too long and\
hard preliminary training. Edna was at her best--delicate, fragile,\
radiant. How the other women hated her for that time-defying beauty of\
hers! Many of the women of her still youthful age retained much of the\
physical attractiveness of youth. But there was not another one who\
was not beginning to show the effects of dissipation--of too much food\
and wine and cigarettes, of lives devoid of elevating sensations, of\
minds used only for petty, mean thoughts. But Edna seemed in the flower\
of that period when the secrets of the soul have as yet made no marks\
upon the countenance. You would have said she was a merry and romantic\
girl. I could not fathom that mystery. I cannot fathom it now. Its clew\
must be in her truly amazing powers of self-deception and also in that\
unique capacity of hers for forgetting the thing, no matter what, that\
is disagreeable to remember.\
\
When we were at last alone, with the young couple off for the yacht\
Lord Shangway had loaned them for the honeymoon, with the last guest\
gone and the last powdered flunkey vanished--when she and I were alone,\
she settled herself with a sigh and said:\
\
\'93I wish I could make it begin all over again!\'94\
\
\'93You must be built of steel,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I am supremely happy,\'94 said she, \'93and have been for weeks. Nothing\
agrees with me so thoroughly as happiness.\'94\
\
I looked at her scrutinizingly. No, she was not the least tired; she\
was as fresh as if that moment risen from a long sleep in the air of\
seashore or mountains.\
\
She went on: \'93I\'92m going over to Paris to-morrow. I\'92ve a lot of\
engagements there. And I must get some clothes. I\'92ve worn out all I\
brought with me.\'94\
\
\'93Worn out\'94 meant worn once or at most twice; for in a society where\
everyone is seeing everyone else all the time a woman with a reputation\
for dress cannot afford to reappear in clothes once seen. In some\
circles this would sound delightfully prodigal, in others delightfully\
impossible, and perhaps in still others delightfully criminal. But then\
all that sort of thing is relative--like everything else in the world.\
\
\'93Won\'92t you come along?\'94 said she in a perfunctory tone.\
\
\'93No, thanks,\'94 I replied. \'93I\'92m off for Russia with a party of bankers to\
look at some mining properties.\'94\
\
\'93I thought you were returning to New York?\'94\
\
\'93Not for several months,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93How can you stay away so long from your beloved America?\'94\
\
\'93Business--always business.\'94\
\
She eyed me somewhat as one eyes a strange, mildly interesting\
specimen. \'93Well--you must enjoy it, or you wouldn\'92t keep at it year in\
and year out.\'94\
\
\'93One has to pass the time,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93How does Mary Kirkwood pass the time?\'94\
\
This unexpected and--except sub-consciously--accidental question,\
staggered me for an instant. \'93I don\'92t know much about it,\'94 said I. \'93She\
has a house--and she looks after it, herself. She reads, I believe.\
She has gardens--and they use up a lot of time. Then she rides.\'94\
\
Edna yawned. \'93It sounds dull,\'94 she said. \'93But domestic people are\
always dull. And she is certainly domestic. I wonder why she doesn\'92t\
marry again.\'94\
\
I was silent.\
\
\'93Are any men attentive to her? It seems to me I heard something about a\
novelist--some poor man who is after her money.\'94\
\
I was choking with rage and jealousy.\
\
\'93Did you see any such man about?\'94\
\
I contrived to compose myself for a calm reply. \'93No one answering to\
your description,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Do you like her?\'94\
\
\'93You asked me that once before,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh--I forgot. It seems to me you and she would have exactly suited\
each other. You like domestic women. That is, you think you do. Really,\
you\'92d probably fly from a woman of that sort.\'94\
\
\'93And a woman of the other sort would fly from me,\'94 said I, laughing.\
\
She looked at me thoughtfully. \'93You must admit you\'92re not easy to get\
on with--except at a distance,\'94 observed she. \'93But men of positive\
individuality are never easy to get on with. A big tree blights all the\
little trees and bushes that try to grow in its neighborhood.... No,\
Godfrey dear, you weren\'92t made for domestic life--you and I. Domestic\
life is successful only where there are two very small and very much\
alike. People like us have to live alone.\'94\
\
I rose abruptly. There was for me a sound in that \'93alone\'94 like the slam\
of a graveyard gate.\
\
\'93You never will appreciate me--how satisfactory I\'92ve been,\'94 she went\
on, \'93until you marry again.\'94\
\
\'93I must make my final arrangements for Russia,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Shall I see you in the morning? I\'92m leaving rather early.\'94\
\
\'93Probably not,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Then we\'92ll meet when you come back. We\'92ll visit Margot at Sothewell\
Abbey.\'94 She rose, drew herself to her full height with a graceful\
gesture of triumph. \'93Don\'92t you honestly rather like it, being the\
father of a Marchioness?\'94\
\
I could not speak. I looked at her.\
\
\'93How solemn you are!\'94 laughed she. \'93Well, good-by, dear.\'94 And she held\
out her hand and turned her face upward for me to kiss her lips.\
\
\'93Oh, I\'92ll probably see you in the morning,\'94 I said, \'93or to-night.\'94 And\
away I went.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
From Russia I drifted to India, intending to return home by the\
Pacific. At Bombay I met Lord Blankenship, and he persuaded me to cross\
to East Africa. I found him a companion exactly to my taste. He was a\
silent chap having nothing to think about and nothing to think with--a\
typical and model product of the aristocratic education that completes\
a man as a sculptor completes an image, and prepares him to stand in\
his appointed niche until decay tumbles him down as rubbish. I had lost\
all my former passion for talking and listening. I wished to confine\
myself--my thoughts--to the trivial matters of the senses, to lingering\
over and tinkering with the physical details of life. The silent and\
vacant Blankenship set me a perfect example, one easy to fall into the\
habit of following.\
\
At Paris, I picked up my private secretary, Markham, and resumed\
attention to my affairs. I had arranged for things to go on without me,\
when I set out for East Africa. I found that my guess as to how they\
would go had been correct. For a month or so there was confusion--the\
confusion that is inevitable when a man who has attended to everything\
abruptly throws up his leadership. Then the affairs in which he fancied\
himself indispensable begin to move as well as if he were at the\
throttle--perhaps better. The most substantial result of my neglect\
seemed to be that I had become much richer, had more than recovered\
what my purchase of a son-in-law had cost me.\
\
Markham, who had been at Cairo two months, had got himself engaged to\
be married. For several years I had been promising him a good position,\
that is to say, one more fitting a grown man of real capacity. But he\
made himself so useful that I put off redeeming my promise and eased my\
conscience and quieted his ambition with a succession of increases of\
salary. Now, however, I could no longer delay releasing him. So I must\
go back to New York, to find some one to take his place. Blankenship\
was wavering between a trip through West Africa and going to America\
with me, on the chance of my accompanying him on a shooting trip\
through British Columbia. He decided to stick to me, and as I had\
grown thoroughly used to having him about I was rather glad. It is\
astonishing how much comfort one can get out of the society of a silent\
man, when one feels that he is a good fellow and a devoted friend.\
\
I telegraphed Edna that I would be unable to come to London, where she\
then was. But she defeated my plan for not seeing her. When I reached\
Paris there she was waiting for me at the Ritz. She had a swarm of\
French, Italians, and English about her--I believe there were some\
Germans or Austrians, also. I refused to be annoyed with them, and we\
dined quietly with Blankenship, Markham, and a pretty little Countess\
de Salevac to act us buffers between us. I tried to avoid being left\
alone with her, but she would not have it so. She insisted on my coming\
to her sitting room after the others had gone.\
\
\'93I know you are tired,\'94 said she, \'93but I shan\'92t detain you long.\'94\
\
\'93Please don\'92t,\'94 said I. \'93The journey has knocked me out. I\'92ve not slept\
for two nights.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s a shame to worry you----\'94\
\
I made for the door. \'93Not to-night--no worries. They\'92ll keep until\
to-morrow.\'94\
\
\'93No, Godfrey dear,\'94 she said. \'93I must tell you at once. There is\
serious trouble between Margot and Hugh.\'94\
\
\'93Why, they haven\'92t been married a year.\'94\
\
\'93He has been treating her shamefully from the outset. In fact, he cut\
short the honeymoon to hurry back to that music-hall person.\'94\
\
\'93The one I saw him with?\'94\
\
\'93Yes--the same one--that notorious Jupey What\'92s-her-name. Isn\'92t it\
dreadful! Margot\'92s pride is up in arms. Nothing I say will quiet her.\'94\
\
\'93Um,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93She refuses to understand that over here husbands are allowed a--a----\'94\
\
\'93Latitude,\'94 I suggested.\
\
\'93More latitude than in America. I have talked with Hugh, too. He\
is--very difficult. Really, he isn\'92t at all as he seemed. He is a--he\
is horribly coarse.\'94\
\
\'93People who think of nothing but how to get money without work and how\
to spend it without usefulness are apt to be coarse, when you probe\
through to the reality of them.\'94\
\
\'93He is--defiant,\'94 pursued she, too femininely practical to have\
interest in or patience with philosophy. \'93He-- Godfrey, he says he\
hates her. He won\'92t speak to her. And there\'92s no prospect of an heir.\
He says he wants to get rid of her.\'94\
\
These successive admissions of a worse and worse mess were forced from\
her by my air of indifference. \'93What has _she_ done?\'94 I asked.\
\
\'93Done? I don\'92t understand----\'94\
\
\'93What has she done to drive him to extremes?\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey!\'94 she cried in a shocked tone. \'93_You_--taking sides against\
your daughter--your only child! Have you no paternal feeling, either?\'94\
\
\'93Not much,\'94 said I. \'93You see, I\'92ve seen little of Margot--not enough\
to get acquainted with her. And you educated her so that we are\
uncongenial. No--since you set me to thinking, I find I haven\'92t much\
paternal feeling for her. I used to have in Passaic, when I wheeled her\
about the streets on Sundays.\'94\
\
I paused to enjoy the shame my wife was struggling with.\
\
\'93But soon after we moved to Brooklyn----\'94\
\
Edna winced and shivered.\
\
\'93You sent her away to begin to be a lady. And a lady she is--and ladies\
are not daughters--are not women even.\'94\
\
\'93You must help me, Godfrey,\'94 said Edna, after a strained silence.\
\'93Margot is wretched, and a dreadful scandal may break out in time.\
Already people are talking. Margot is ashamed to show herself in\
public. She thinks everyone is laughing at her.\'94\
\
\'93No doubt she\'92s right,\'94 said I. \'93A woman who loses her husband on the\
honeymoon is likely to be laughed at.... What did she do?\'94\
\
\'93Why do you persist in saying that?\'94 cried she, so irritated that she\
could not altogether restrain herself. \'93Your dislike of women has\
become a mania with you.\'94\
\
\'93But I don\'92t dislike them,\'94 replied I. \'93On the contrary, I like\
them--like them so well that their worthlessness angers me like the\
treachery of a friend. And I believe so much in their power that, when\
things go wrong, I blame them. They have dominion over the men and over\
the children. And whenever they use their powers it is to make fools of\
the men and weaklings of the children. I don\'92t know which is the worse\
influence--the wishy-washy, unpractical, preacher morality of the good\
woman or the lazy, idle, irresponsible dissipation of the--the ladies\
and near-ladies and lady-climbers and lady-imitators.\'94\
\
\'93But this has nothing to do with poor Margot!\'94 exclaimed she\
impatiently.\
\
\'93Everything to do with her,\'94 replied I. \'93Still--it\'92s a spilt pail of\
milk. As for the present--and future-- How can I do anything to help\
her?\'94\
\
\'93You can\'92t, if you condemn her unheard.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t condemn her. I am simply recognizing that there are two sides\
to this quarrel. And I assure you, you only make matters worse when you\
interfere without recognizing that fact. So I say again, what did _she_\
do?\'94\
\
My wife calmed slightly and replied: \'93He says she made him ridiculous\
with the airs she put on.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93After the education you gave her?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s right! Blame me!\'94\
\
\'93And aren\'92t you to be blamed?\'94 urged I. \'93Didn\'92t you have full charge of\
her from the time she was born? Couldn\'92t you have made what you pleased\
of her? Didn\'92t you make what you pleased of her?\'94\
\
Edna tossed her head indignantly. \'93I never taught her to be a vulgar\
snob.\'94\
\
\'93Why, I thought that was her whole education.\'94\
\
Edna ignored this interruption. \'93It\'92s all very well for the women of\
noble families to act the snob,\'94 pursued she. \'93Lots of them do, and no\
one criticises. But Margot ought to have had sense enough to realize\
that she, a mere American, couldn\'92t afford to do it. I warned her that\
her cue was sweetness and an air of equality. I told her that her\
title in itself would keep people at their proper distance. But she\
lost her head.\'94\
\
\'93Then the thing for her to do is to behave herself.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s too late, I\'92m afraid. The tide has turned against her. All the\
women--especially the titled English women of good family--were against\
her--hated her--were ready to stab her in the back. And her haughtiness\
and condescension gave them the chance.\'94\
\
\'93Well, what do you propose? To give him more money?\'94\
\
Edna showed none of her familiar scorn of sordid things. She reflected,\
said uncertainly: \'93I wonder would that do any good?\'94\
\
\'93To win anyone give them what they most want,\'94 said I. \'93What do your\
friends over here want above everything and anything?\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps you are right,\'94 confessed she. Consider, gentle reader, what\
this confession involved, how it exposed the rotten insincerity of\
all her and her fine friends\'92 pretenses. \'93Yes, I guess you\'92re right,\
Godfrey.\'94 She pressed her hands to her temples. \'93It simply _must_ be\
straightened out. I am quite distracted. I can\'92t afford to lose sleep\
and to be harrowed up. Those things mean ruin to a woman\'92s looks.\
And what _would_ I do if she were flung back on my hands in this\
disgraceful fashion!\'94\
\
\'93You want me to go to London?\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey, you _must_ go. You must see her, and him, too.\'94\
\
\'93I was thinking it would be enough to see him. But perhaps you\'92re\
right.\'94\
\
\'93She is clean mad,\'94 cried Edna, with sudden fury against her daughter.\
\'93She doesn\'92t appreciate the peril of her position. One minute she\'92s\
all for groveling. The next she talks like an idiot about her rank and\
power. Oh, she is a fool--a _fool_! I always knew she was--though I\
wouldn\'92t admit it to myself. You never will know what a time I\'92ve had\
training her to hide it enough to make a pleasing appearance. She is a\
brainless fool.\'94\
\
\'93A fool, but not brainless,\'94 said I. \'93Her education made her a fool and\
paralyzed her brain. You see, she didn\'92t have the advantages you had\
in your early training. In your early days you had the chance to learn\
something--the useful things that have saved you from the consequences\
of such folly as you\'92ve taught her.\'94\
\
\'93What nonsense!\'94 cried Edna in disgust. \'93But we mustn\'92t quarrel. I\'92m\
agitated enough already. You will go to London?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said I, after reflecting. \'93I\'92ll go.\'94\
\
\'93When?\'94\
\
\'93To-morrow.\'94\
\
\'93And I\'92ll go with you.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said I firmly. \'93Either I manage this affair alone or I have\
nothing to do with it.\'94\
\
\'93But, Godfrey, there are so many things about these people that you\
don\'92t understand. And you----\'94\
\
\'93I understand the essential thing,\'94 said I. \'93And that is their mania\
for money.\'94\
\
She was on the verge of hysteria--afraid I would not go, afraid of what\
I would do if I did go. \'93But they have to be handled carefully,\'94 she\
urged. \'93If you put them in a position where their pride won\'92t let them\
take the--the money----\'94\
\
\'93Trust me,\'94 said I. \'93Go to bed, sleep soundly, and trust me.\'94\
\
I stood. She suddenly flung herself against my breast and began to\
sob on my shoulder. \'93You are hard and cold,\'94 she said. \'93You have no\
sympathy with me--no feeling for anything but business. But somehow--in\
spite of it all--I have such a sense of your strength and your honesty.\'94\
\
I laughed rather awkwardly, patted her shoulder, helped her to a chair.\
\'93There are times when a coarse, common American business man of a\
husband has his uses--and advantages,\'94 I said lightly. \'93I\'92ll telegraph\
you how things are going.\'94\
\
She dried her eyes, looked at me in a puzzled way. \'93You always repulse\
me,\'94 she said.\
\
\'93I appreciate your kindness in remembering to toss a few crumbs to the\
starving man,\'94 laughed I. \'93They are precious crumbs, no doubt, and more\
than he deserves. But--please don\'92t do it. He hates that sort of thing.\
You are free to act as you feel like acting. I\'92ll do as much for you\
and Margot without the crumbs as with them.\'94\
\
\'93How hard you are, Godfrey! How you have always misunderstood me!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s right,\'94 said I amiably. \'93I\'92m too coarse for such a fine nature.\
Well--good night.\'94\
\
I took myself hastily away to bed; and at ten the next morning I\
departed for London.\
\
I decided to see Margot first. She was at Sothewell Abbey, about an\
hour by express from Paddington. You perhaps know Sothewell Abbey\
through the pictures and descriptions. And it is indeed an imposing\
pile of old masonry seated in the midst of a park of surpassing beauty.\
As soon as I entered the ancient gates for the two-mile drive to the\
Abbey, I saw signs that my money was in action. When I first visited\
it, the lodge was in sad disrepair, the gates were about to fall to\
pieces and the vista of the drive was unkempt. Now, all was changed.\
The servile pair who came out to open for me, and made me fear they\
would drop down on their bellies and crawl before me, were neatly and\
properly dressed, in strong contrast to their former appearance.\
\
The exterior of the house, which had been most \'93romantic\'94 but obviously\
the front of poverty and decay, looked much better--not younger I\
hasten to assure you, quiet reader, but somewhat like a hairless,\
toothless old man when he gets a nice white wig on his pate and a set\
of good false teeth on his shriveled gums. I saw gardeners at work--and\
plenty there was for them to do. Within, I saw evidences of a more\
adequate staff of servants; but the great halls were dreary and bare\
and dingy. That was a cold summer in England, even colder than the\
summer usually is. So, the enormous house was literally uninhabitable,\
like all the European palaces, city and country, that I have been in.\
I can fancy what such a place must be in winter with no way of heating\
it but open fireplaces, and not many of them. I can\'92t conceive any\
sane American, used to comfort in the way of steam heat, spending\
a winter in the English country. I know it is done by Americans\
reputedly sane; but if those at home knew what Europe in winter\
meant--the old-fashioned \'93romantic\'94 Europe--they would not believe\
their expatriated countrymen sane in sacrificing comfort and health to\
vanity. Yes, I believe they would; for, do not they, at home, make the\
same imbecile sacrifices to vanity in other ways?\
\
\'93Take me to some small warm room,\'94 said I to Margot, \'93before I catch my\
death of cold.\'94 This the instant I was within doors and felt in my very\
marrow the clammy chill of that picturesque vaulted hall.\
\
\'93There isn\'92t any warm room in the house,\'94 replied she.\
\
\'93How about the kitchen?\'94 said I.\
\
She looked alarmed--being her mother\'92s own daughter, in lack of the\
sense of humor as in many other ways. She said hastily: \'93The upstairs\
rooms are a little better.\'94\
\
\'93They couldn\'92t be worse. These rooms are cold storage.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m getting used to it,\'94 said she. \'93One doesn\'92t mind it so much after\
a while.\'94\
\
Her nose was red and swollen, and her voice husky. She had a frightful\
cold at that very moment. \'93Why don\'92t you get out of here and go to a\
decent modern hotel in town?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Give up possession!\'94 cried she in horror. \'93He might not let me come\
back.\'94\
\
It was too ridiculous. \'93Possession of what?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh, _papa_!\'94 cried she, in despair and shame at my coarse stupidity.\
\
\'93Possession of what?\'94 I repeated. \'93Of a dirty, dingy old cold-storage\
plant. Why should you want to come back? Put on your wraps and let\'92s\
fly to town by the next train.\'94\
\
She burst into tears. \'93I\'92d rather die!\'94 she sobbed. \'93I _won\'92t_ give up\
my position. I am Marchioness of Crossley and I belong here.\'94\
\
\'93All right,\'94 said I. \'93Let\'92s try the smaller rooms.\'94\
\
She led me up a vast stairway--it would have thrilled your soul,\
gentle reader. Think how it sounds, put into the fitting language--\
\'93The beautiful young Marchioness conducted her father up the ancient\
and magnificent stairway that rose from the spacious medi\'e6val hall and\
swept in a curve of wonderfully wrought stone work, dating from the\
thirteenth century, to the upper chambers of the majestic old abbey.\'94 I\
hurried her as fast as I could, for we both were sneezing and a hideous\
draught like the breath of death was streaming from somewhere. I don\'92t\
mind looking at pictures of abbeys and the like; but when I read of the\
grandeur of living in that sort of place, I laugh. The men who built\
them did as well as they could in the age they lived in. But what shall\
be said of men who dwell in them now, when infinitely better is to be\
had?\
\
Those upper chambers! Cold, clammy, draughty--the furniture and\
hangings old and dowdy. And my daughter\'92s room! Like a squalid,\
decrepit tenement flat. Yes, squalid; for the rugs and draperies were\
dirty, were stained and frayed. There was a distinct tenement odor.\
\
\'93Isn\'92t it fascinating?\'94 said she, gazing round with sparkling eyes.\
\
\'93Where\'92s the fire?\'94 said I.\
\
She led me to a smelly, low-ceilinged little room, like a segment out\
of a hovel. It was her boudoir, she informed me. In one wall, in a\
dinky fireplace burned a handful of fire.\
\
\'93Is that it?\'94 said I. \'93Is that all?\'94\
\
\'93You must remember, papa,\'94 said she proudly, \'93that this isn\'92t a\
_modern_ house.\'94\
\
\'93Ring for a servant,\'94 said I. \'93This overcoat of mine is too light. I\
must have wraps if I\'92m to sit here. And you\'92d better get out your furs\
and put them on.\'94\
\
\'93The servants\'92d think me mad,\'94 said she. \'93Must you have a coat?\'94\
\
\'93No--that spread will do,\'94 said I. And I jerked it from the sofa and\
flung it round my shoulders. \'93I don\'92t want to upset your establishment.\
Good God, I had no idea people with any money at all anywhere on earth\
lived like this. If you\'92re going to stay here, you must put in steam\
heat.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, we couldn\'92t do that, papa dear,\'94 said she with a plaintive\
mingling of shame for me and apology for the tradition against sense\
and health.\
\
\'93Let\'92s get to business, Margot,\'94 said I. \'93Sit in the fireplace--that\'92s\
right. What\'92s the trouble? Your mother has explained--has told all she\
knew. I\'92ve come to find what the quarrel is _really_ about.\'94\
\
\'93Has she told you of that woman?\'94\
\
\'93Why did he go back to her?\'94\
\
She began to sob. \'93Oh, the hideous things he said to me! I\
didn\'92t dream a gentleman could talk like that. He called me a low\
American--said he was ashamed of me--said he was going to get rid of me\
at any cost, said----\'94\
\
\'93But what had you _done_!\'94 interrupted I.\
\
\'93Nothing!\'94 she cried, lifting her flushed face. \'93Absolutely\
nothing--except worship him.\'94\
\
\'93What had you done?\'94 I repeated. As she started to rise I restrained\
her. \'93Stay in the fireplace. What was the beginning of the row--the\
very beginning?\'94\
\
Her eyes wavered, but she said: \'93Nothing, papa!\'94 though less vigorously.\
\
\'93It was about money,\'94 said I. \'93It always is--in all ranks of society.\
The beginnings of the quarrels have money at the bottom of them.\
Now--tell me!\'94\
\
She was silent.\
\
\'93I can\'92t help you unless you do.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, it was so sordid!\'94 cried she. \'93And I thought him high above those\
things.\'94\
\
\'93No one that\'92s human is,\'94 said I. \'93Any person who wears pants or skirts\
that have to be paid for is not above money.\'94\
\
\'93He wanted me to turn over to him all I had,\'94 said she. \'93Think of that!\'94\
\
\'93I might have known,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93He said it was beneath his dignity as an English gentleman to have a\
wife independent of him. And, do you know, papa, I was so infatuated\
that I almost yielded. I could see his point of view. And I\'92d have been\
glad to come to him for every cent. Only--\'94 She stopped short.\
\
\'93Only what?\'94 I urged.\
\
\'93I heard about that other woman. And his way of treating me-- He said\
it was the proper way for a marquis to treat his marchioness. And I\
liked the dignity and the beauty of it all, when others were about. But\
it seemed to me that when we were alone-- Oh, papa, I can\'92t tell you\
these things.\'94\
\
\'93Never mind,\'94 said I. \'93I understand.\'94\
\
\'93And I was--a little jealous, away down in my heart--and suspicious.\
And I was afraid he wanted the money to spend on _her_.\'94\
\
\'93Um,\'94 said I. \'93You didn\'92t tell your mother this?\'94\
\
\'93She hates sordidness of every kind,\'94 said Margot. \'93And I hadn\'92t the\
courage. Besides, I\'92m sure mamma would have advised me to let him\
have his way. She wouldn\'92t sympathize with the--the weak side of my\
character.\'94\
\
I was interested. Could it be that Edna\'92s daughter had a \'93weak\'94--a\
human side? Could it be that her education and her mode of life had not\
altogether killed the natural and made her soul a garden of artificial\
flowers only?\
\
\'93So, you want to be free from him?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Free from him!\'94 cried she, aghast. \'93Give up my position? Oh,\
papa--never--_never_!\'94\
\
\'93But you don\'92t love him. Don\'92t come away from that fire!\'94\
\
She seated herself by the miserable smoky little blaze again. \'93He is my\
husband. I am his wife. I am the Marchioness of Crossley.\'94 And she drew\
herself up with as much of an air as her cold and the contracted space\
in the chimney-piece permitted. Unluckily, the sudden gesture caused a\
current of air, and she sneezed once--twice--three times.\
\
\'93Better get those furs,\'94 said I. \'93You want the man back?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed. I must have him back.\'94 She clasped her hands and wailed,\
\'93If I only had a son! Then--_then_ I\'92d show Hugh that he couldn\'92t\
trample on me. But he has me in his power now. If he casts me off\
I shan\'92t have any position at all. The women are down on me. They\
hate all the American women, except those who toady to them and give\
them money or jewelry or pay their bridge and dressmaker\'92s bills.\
And they\'92re only too glad of the chance to crush me. But they\'92ll not\
succeed!\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94 said I dryly.\
\
She burst into tears. \'93Oh, I don\'92t know what to do! Papa, shall I give\
him the money?--sign over all my income to him and take only what he\'92ll\
allow me? And would he come back if I did?\'94\
\
\'93He would not,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Then--what _shall_ I do? Oh, what slaves we women are! Think of it,\
papa! He wants to make a _slave_ of me--said he didn\'92t believe in women\
gadding about and showing themselves off in costly dresses and causing\
scandalous talk--said my place was at home--looking after the house and\
that sort of thing!\'94 She laughed wildly. \'93Like a low, common servant!\
And he--he free to carry on with that woman!\'94\
\
\'93You might teach him to stay at home, if you set him a good example,\'94\
suggested I.\
\
\'93But I don\'92t want to stay at home!\'94 cried she. \'93I didn\'92t marry for\
that. I want to enjoy all the privileges of my rank.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I wasn\'92t brought up to be like a low, middle-class woman, or a\
workingman\'92s wife.\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed,\'94 said I. \'93You are a lady. You\'92re made, not to be of use in\
the world, but to enjoy yourself.\'94\
\
She seemed to find some cause for dissatisfaction in my enthusiastic\
tone. \'93Of course,\'94 she said, \'93I shall do my duty as a member of the\
high nobility--lead in society and open bazars and visit the poor on\
our estate and--and all that.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed,\'94 said I. \'93And the world being what it is, there\'92s no\
reason why you shouldn\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93Do you think you can bring him back, papa?\'94\
\
\'93That depends on you,\'94 said I warily.\
\
\'93I\'92ll do anything--anything. I\'92ll crawl to him, if he wants me to.\
After all, he _is_ the Marquis of Crossley, and I\'92m only an American\
nobody.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s the proper spirit,\'94 said I. \'93But you mustn\'92t show it to\
him _too_ plainly. Be moderate. A little pretense of dignity--of\
self-respect.\'94\
\
\'93I understand,\'94 said she seriously--she was indeed Edna\'92s own daughter.\
\'93I\'92ll be as I was before we were married.\'94 Her eyes flashed. \'93Oh, I can\
bide my time. When I have a son!\'94\
\
\'93Get ready and come up to town to-night,\'94 said I, with a most\
unfatherly gruffness and curtness, I fear. \'93I\'92m off now to deal with\
him.\'94\
\
\'93Be careful not to wound his pride, papa,\'94 she cautioned.\
\
\'93I realize the danger of that,\'94 replied I. \'93Come to the Savoy. Be on\
hand, so I can get hold of you whenever I need you.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, papa _dear_!\'94 she cried, and cast herself into my arms.\
\
I brushed my lips upon her crown of hair--it was false hair, that\
being the fashion of the day. \'93Try to make yourself as pretty as you\
can,\'94 said I, releasing her and myself. \'93You\'92ll hear from me to-night\
or to-morrow, unless I\'92ve caught my death in this damp cave. You must\
leave it to the frogs, and snakes, and bats, and build yourself a\
decent house somewhere. You\'92ll die here.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m afraid Hugh wouldn\'92t consent to _live_ anywhere but here. It\'92s\
the ancestral seat, you know. The Massingfords have lived here since\
forever and ever.\'94\
\
\'93Have died here, you mean. Have killed wives they wanted to get rid of,\
here.\'94\
\
She startled--looked excitedly at me. \'93Papa!\'94 she exclaimed\
breathlessly. \'93Yes--I wouldn\'92t put it past him!\'94\
\
I laughed.\
\
She drew a long breath of relief. \'93Oh, you weren\'92t in earnest,\'94 she\
said.\
\
\'93No,\'94 replied I. \'93But--don\'92t live here.\'94\
\
\'93I shan\'92t,\'94 said she firmly. \'93It\'92s dreadful for the looks. You\'92ve seen\
what so many of these English women look like.\'94\
\
\'93Like shriveled, frost-bitten apples,\'94 said I. \'93They don\'92t die\
because they\'92re used to it. But it\'92s death for people accustomed to\
civilization. Not even the steady glow of pride in your title and\
position can keep you heated up enough to save you.\'94\
\
\'93Will you give Hugh a house, if he\'92ll consent?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.... Until to-night or to-morrow.\'94\
\
And I fled from the romantic old Abbey, but not soon enough to avoid\
what was threatening to be the cold of my life.\
\
\
\
\
IX\
\
\
The moment I was in London, and before that Sothewell Abbey cold had\
a chance to grip me, I went at it. Starve, stay in bed, and keep the\
air out for a day--that\'92s the way to put a cold out of business.\
Unless it be some occasional prodigy endowed with superhuman common\
sense and self-restraint, no one learns how to take care of his health\
except by experience. The doctors know precious little about disease;\
about health they know nothing--naturally, they have no interest in\
health. The average human being not only does not know how to take care\
of his health, but also does not wish to learn how; health involves\
self-denial, cutting down on food, drink, tobacco and the other joys\
of life. So he who wishes to avoid enormous payments in discomfort\
and pain for slight neglects and transgressions of physical laws has\
to work it out for himself. I\'92ve made several valuable discoveries in\
the science and art of living; about the most valuable of them is that\
every illness starts under cover of a cold. So I instantly take myself\
in hand whenever I begin to sneeze and to have chilly sensations or\
a catch in the throat. The result has been that since I was thirty I\
have not spent a cent on doctors or lost a day through illness, and\
I\'92ve eaten and drunk about as I pleased. I can see gentle reader\'92s\
expression of disdain at these confessions as to my care for health.\
You are welcome to your disdain, gentle reader. It is characteristic of\
your shallowness. You see, the chief difference between you and me is\
that I have imagination while you have not. And as I have imagination,\
illness makes to my mind a picture of revolting internal conditions\
which I can no more endure than I could endure having my outside\
unclean and frowzy.\
\
Margot, coming by a later train, sent me word that she was ill. She had\
called in a doctor. He poured some medicine--some poison--into her, of\
course, and so got her into the way of giving him an excuse for robbing\
her. In England doctors rank socially with butchers and bakers, rank\
scientifically with voodoo quacks and astrologers. They still look on\
a cold as a trifle, and treat it by feeding! The food and drugs she\
swallowed soon reduced Margot to the state where it was taking all\
the reserve force of her youth to save her from severe illness. I was\
entirely well the following day, and went to see her. The doctor--five\
guineas or twenty-five dollars a visit--was coming twice a day; his\
assistant--two guineas or ten dollars a visit--was coming four times a\
day. The Marchioness of Crossley, a rich American, was ill. Her social\
position and Dr. Sir Spratt Wallet\'92s rank as a practitioner together\
made it imperative that the illness be no ordinary affair. The second\
day he issued bulletins to the papers. I attempted to interfere in the\
treatment, but Margot would not have it.\
\
\'93She\'92s growing worse instead of better,\'94 said I to Wallet.\
\
\'93Certainly, sir,\'94 replied he. \'93That is the regular course with a\
cold.\'94 And he stroked his whiskers and looked at me with dull,\
self-complacent, supercilious eyes. \'93The regular course, sir.\'94\
\
\'93In England, but not in America,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I dare say,\'94 said he, with heavy politeness. Then, after a heavy\
pause, \'93her ladyship will be quite fit again in a week--quite fit.\'94\
\
As she was eating three strapping meals a day and taking rhinitis and\
another equally poisonous drug I had my doubts. But once you let a\
doctor in you are powerless. If you order him out without giving him an\
opportunity in his own good time to cure the mischief he has done the\
consequences may be serious. Not to linger over this incident in high\
life, Wallet made out of that cold a hundred guineas, not counting his\
commissions on the fees of his assistant, on the wages of a trained\
nurse, and on the stuff from the chemist. If Margot had been English\
born the bill would have been about one fourth that sum--for the same\
rank in society. Slay the Midianite! But that\'92s the rule the world\
over. When I am \'93trimmed\'94 abroad I console myself with reflecting on\
the fate of the luckless foreigner visiting America. Europe trims us to\
the quick; but we trim to the bone; and when no foreigners are handy we\
keep in practice by trimming one another.\
\
Margot\'92s illness did not interfere with my efforts to right her\
matrimonial ship and set it in its course again. I had greatly modified\
my original plan. It involved my seeking the Marquis. My new plan was\
to compel him to seek me. I proceeded so successfully that on the\
morning of the third day of Margot\'92s \'93indisposition,\'94 while I was at\
breakfast in my sitting room, Markham came in with a grin of triumph on\
his face. \'93You win,\'94 he cried. \'93But you always do.\'94\
\
\'93Dawkins?\'94\
\
\'93Here\'92s his card.\'94\
\
\'93Let him up. No--wait.... Tell him I\'92ll see him in half an hour.\'94\
\
Gentle reader, you are about to learn why in that controversy over\
settlements _I_ abruptly abandoned the struggle and yielded everything.\
I worked with Markham at my mail and telegrams for three quarters of an\
hour before I let Dawkins in. I saw at a glance that my treatment of\
him had produced the effect I had hoped. He was a typical middle-class\
Englishman--but all middle-class Englishmen are typical. He was fattish\
and baldish and smug. He had a beef-and-beer face, ruddy and smooth\
except tufts of red-gray, curling whiskers before either ear. He had\
cold, shrewd, pious eyes--the eyes of the hypocrite who serves the\
Lord with every breath he draws, and gets a blessing upon every crime\
he commits before committing it. In my first interviews with him I,\
being new to England, had made the mistake of treating him as an\
equal, that is, as a human being. My respect for myself forbids me to\
meet any of my fellow-members of the human race in any other fashion.\
But experience has taught me that in doing business with a man, it\
is being absolutely necessary that you dominate him unless you are\
willing to have him dominate you, the most skillful care must be taken\
to impress him with your superiority. A certain amount of \'93side\'94 is\
useful in America. A lot of it is imperative in England; and if you\
are dealing with an Englishman who feels that he is low, you dare not\
treat him as an equal or he at once imagines you are lower than he, and\
despicable--and you can do nothing with him.\
\
I had suffered, and so had my lawyer, Norman, for our American way of\
treating Dawkins. I appreciated my mistake afterwards, and resolved\
not to repeat it. I studied the manner of Crossley and Blankenship and\
the other upper-class men toward the middle and lower classes, and I\
learned to copy it, an accomplishment of which I am not proud, though\
common sense forbids me to be ashamed of it. Dawkins, entering with\
heels thoroughly cooled, made ready to put out his hand, but did so\
hesitatingly. He saw that his worst fears were realized, altered the\
handshaking gesture into a tug at his right whiskers. Nor did I offer\
him a seat, but simply looked at him pleasantly over the top of my\
newspaper and said:\
\
\'93Ah, Dawkins, is that you?\'94\
\
\'93Good morning, Mr. Loring. Hope you are well, sir,\'94 said Dawkins, now\
squeezing awkwardly into his proper place.\
\
I half turned my back on him and dictated a note and a telegram to\
Markham. Then I glanced at Dawkins again. \'93Ah, Dawkins, yes--what were\
you saying?\'94\
\
\'93I would esteem it a favor, sir, if you would give me a few minutes of\
your time--alone.\'94\
\
\'93We are alone,\'94 said I. \'93What is it?\'94\
\
The solicitor shifted his portly frame uneasily, smoothed his top hat\
with his gloved left hand, glanced dubiously at Markham. \'93The matter is\
confidential, sir--relating to--to the family.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Markham knows more about my affairs than I do,\'94 said I. \'93Don\'92t\
beat about the bush, Dawkins. I have no time to waste.\'94\
\
\'93Very well, sir. I beg your pardon. It concerns those bonds--the bonds\
you turned over to me in arranging the settlements.\'94\
\
\'93Yes. I remember. Great Lakes and Gulf bonds, were they not?\'94\
\
\'93Precisely, sir. You bound us to a stipulation that they were not to be\
converted for at least five years.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s right,\'94 said I. \'93In fact, I made it impossible for you to\
convert them.\'94\
\
A pained expression came into the face of Dawkins.\
\
\'93I believe I conceded everything else your client demanded,\'94 pursued I.\
\
\'93But it now develops, sir,\'94 said Dawkins, \'93that that was the only\
important thing.\'94\
\
\'93Really?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You have doubtless seen the papers these last few days--the stock\
market.\'94\
\
\'93Yes.... Yes--so the bonds _are_ dropping. That\'92s unfortunate.\'94\
\
\'93Dropping rapidly,\'94 said Dawkins. \'93And there are rumors that Great\
Lakes and Gulf will soon be practically worthless.\'94\
\
\'93So I\'92ve read.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve come to ask you to release us. We wish to sell. We must sell. If\
we don\'92t the settlement on your son-in-law will be worthless.\'94\
\
I smiled agreeably. \'93As worthless as his promises to my daughter. As\
worthless as he is.\'94\
\
Dawkins was breathing heavily. His pious eyes were snapping with rage.\
He had prided himself on his astuteness. He had gloated over his\
shrewdness in outwitting Norman and me. And now he discovered that the\
boot was on the other leg. I had trapped him and put him and his client\
in my power.\
\
I leaned back comfortably and smiled. \'93Of course I know nothing about\
it, Dawkins, but I am willing to make a Yankee guess that the bonds\
will continue to drop until----\'94\
\
When my pause became unendurable, he said: \'93Yes, sir. Until when?\'94\
\
\'93Until I discover some signs of value in my son-in-law. Then he may\
discover some signs of value in the bonds. Our America is a peculiar\
country, Dawkins.\'94\
\
\'93Peculiar will do, sir,\'94 said he with respectful insolence. \'93But I\
should have chosen another word.\'94\
\
I shook my head laughingly. \'93What bad losers you English are!\'94 said I.\
\'93But--I\'92ll not detain you. Good morning, Dawkins.\'94\
\
\'93Then I am to understand, sir----\'94\
\
But I had my back squarely to him and was busy with Markham, who took\
his cue for the little comedy we were playing like the well-trained\
American business man that he was. Presently Markham said, \'93He\'92s gone,\
and I never saw a madder man get out of a room more awkwardly.\'94\
\
You, gentle reader, who know about as much of the science of\
managing men in practical life as you know of any other phase of the\
world-that-is--you, gentle reader, are shocked by my rudeness to a\
polite, well-educated, well-dressed Englishman. And you hope--and\
feel--that I overreached myself. But let me inform you--not for your\
instruction but for my own satisfaction--courtesy has to be used most\
sparingly. Human vanity is so monstrous that men eagerly read into\
politeness to them--the most ordinary politeness--evidence that their\
superiority is inspiring fear, awe and desire to conciliate them.\
You often hear men in high place severely criticised for being rude,\
short, arrogant, insulting. Do not condemn them too hastily. It may be\
that they were driven into this attitude toward their fellows by the\
disastrous consequences of courtesy. Be polite to a man and he will\
misunderstand. Be cool to him and he, thickly enveloped in his own good\
opinion of himself, will not feel it. Rudeness, overt and unmistakable,\
is often the one way to reach him and save not only yourself but also\
him from the consequences of his vanity. It is the instinct of big men\
to be big and simple and natural in their dealings with their fellows.\
The mass of little men with big vanities compels them to suppress this\
instinct; and by suppression it inevitably becomes in time crushed out\
of existence. How can one who is busy continue to show consideration\
for others if they, instead of showing a return consideration for him,\
take it as tribute to their importance and begin to rear and impose and\
trample?\
\
To cite my own relatively unimportant case, I have long had a\
reputation for coldness and meager civility in my business relations.\
I recall distinctly the desperate pressure of sheer imposition that\
led me to abandon my early openness to all comers at all times. And I\
admit that I did change; rather abruptly, too, for it suddenly came to\
me why I was slipping backwards. But looking only at my career _since_\
the change, when I think of the boredom I have endured, the folly I\
have permitted to waste my valuable time--when I recall the forbearance\
I have shown in sparing impudent and lazy incompetence where I might,\
yes, ought to have used the ax--when I think of my good-natured\
tolerance in face of extremest daily provocation, year after year,\
I marvel at myself and feel how unjust, how characteristically the\
verdict of little shallow men, is the attack on me as cold and\
unsympathetic. When I consider how the leaders of the human race have\
been tempted to tyranny, I cannot understand why history is able to\
record comparatively few real tyrants, most of them being homicidal\
lunatics like Nero, or success-crazed megalomaniacs like Napoleon,\
and almost none men of sanity. If the great of earth were as vain, as\
selfishly, as egotistically inconsiderate of the small as the small are\
of the great and of each other, would not the story of history have\
come to an end long ago for lack of surviving characters?\
\
Two days after Dawkins came Crossley. I knew that in America there is\
no one so easily frightened as a rich man who has inherited his wealth\
and does not know whether, if he lost it, he could make a living or\
not. All rich men are cowards, but that species is craven. I suspected\
that the same thing was true of the European type--the nobleman\
with the grotesque pose of disdain for money that convinces and\
captivates you, gentle reader, and your favorite authors. Crossley\'92s\
face instantly showed me that my suspicion was correct. He had been\
dissipating wildly for several weeks, but it did not account for the\
look in his eyes. If, gentle reader, you wish to learn the truth about\
the aristocracy you worship--which you do not--get an aristocrat\
where you can cut off or turn on his supply of cash at will. You will\
then discover that he who has a stiff neck also has supple knees--the\
stiffer the neck the suppler the knees.\
\
Crossley was a clever chap in his way; that is, he knew his business\
of idle spender of unearned money thoroughly. Another mode of putting\
it would be the commonplace and less exact if more alluring phrase\
\'93aristocrat to his finger tips.\'94 There are many modes of cringing. He\
showed judgment and taste--judgment of me, taste in sparing himself--in\
his choice of the mode. With fright and wariness in his eyes--the look\
of readiness to go to any depths of self-abasement in gaining his\
end--he put a tone of manly, bluff, shamefaced contrition into his\
voice as he said:\
\
\'93Pardon my breaking in on you this way. I\'92ve just heard. Is _she_ very\
ill?\'94\
\
He meant he had just heard about the bonds. I knew he meant that, and\
he knew I knew it. But we were men of the world. \'93Not desperately\
ill,\'94 said I. \'93Only about twenty guineas a day.\'94\
\
He smiled a faint but flattering appreciation of my humor, then resumed\
his gloomy anxiety and self-reproach. \'93But she _is_ ill. I read it in\
one of those screaming ha\'92penny rags and came as fast as ever I could.\
The truth is--well, we\'92ve had a bit of a row. Has she told you?\'94\
\
\'93Not much,\'94 said I. \'93A little.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve acted the skunk, the howling skunk--and I want to-- Do you think\
she\'92ll see me?\'94\
\
\'93If you wish, I\'92ll find out.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92d be no end grateful,\'94 said he with enthusiasm.\
\
She saw him as soon as she could make herself presentable--and her\
delay gave him a chance to tone up his nerves and to smooth out his\
face. That afternoon I was able to telegraph Edna that all was well\
The Crossleys were reconciled; Love had scored another of his famous\
triumphs. She came over the following day, but I had sailed for America\
a few hours before.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
The day after my arrival in New York I saw Mary Kirkwood and Hartley\
Beechman lunching together at Delmonico\'92s. In those days that meant\
an engagement actual or impending--or, at least, a flirtation far\
advanced into the stage of loverlike intimacy. I was in the passageway\
looking through the glass and the screen of palms. I stood there long,\
noting every detail of her. She was well, perfectly well--of that much\
her eyes and her color assured me. Is there anything lovelier than\
a clear dark skin, tastefully set off by black-brown hair? Was she\
happy? I could not tell. Still in her face was that restless, expectant\
look--not unlike the expression of a child being shown a picture\
book and too impatient for the next page rightly to examine the one\
that is open. An intense interest in life, an intense vitality--that\
fascinating capacity to love, if she found the right man. And her\
beauty----\
\
Beauty she undoubtedly had. But charm does not lie in beauty--physical\
charm, I mean. There is a certain light in the eyes, a certain curve of\
cheek and throat, of bosom and arm--and the blood flames and rushes.\
She had charm for me. Her beauty impressed others; it was her charm\
that made her the one woman to me.\
\
Blankenship came to take me into the caf\'e9 where we were to lunch. I\
went with the meager consolation that while I had stood there she had\
given Beechman not a single glance with any suggestion of a feeling it\
would have wounded me to the quick to see. Should I speak to her? Did\
I dare risk the attempt? Would not speaking to her be merely a useless\
torment? After a long struggle that could have but one end, I said:\
\'93Excuse me,\'94 rose and went to the palm room. They were gone; the waiter\
was clearing the table at which they had been sitting. I stared round\
dazedly, returned to Blankenship.\
\
\'93You\'92re not up to the mark--what?\'94 said he.\
\
\'93New York doesn\'92t agree with me.\'94\
\
\'93I hate towns. They give you such dirty second-hand stuff to breathe.\
Let\'92s move on--what?\'94\
\
\'93To-morrow,\'94 I said.\
\
But it seemed there was no place on earth for me. Don\'92t judge me so\
poorly as to think, or to imagine I thought, this was due wholly to\
Mary Kirkwood. I wish to be carefully, exactly accurate in this frank\
recital of a man\'92s point of view. She was responsible for my forlorn\
state to the extent that loving her had revealed to me the futility\
and failure of my own life and had made me see another sort of life\
that would have been possible with her, that was impossible without\
her--without love and comradeship. But loving her did not make my life\
empty; it was already empty, though I had not realized it. I understood\
now why the big business men, as soon as they reached security,\
cast about for some real interest. Most of them--nearly all--were\
as unfortunate in their family relations as I. They had trivial\
wives and trivial children--mere silly strutters and spenders. They\
sought interest in art, in science, in religion, in exploration, in\
philanthropy, in politics, in stamps and butterflies, in old books and\
antiques, in racing stables and prize fighting, in gambling, in drink,\
in women. Their craving was now mine. How to find an interest that\
would make life attractive to me, with Mary Kirkwood left out--there\
was my problem.\
\
While waiting for the solution, I followed Blankenship to the\
Northwest. The second day from New York, as he and I were walking\
up and down the platform during a halt--at St. Paul, I think it\
was--Hartley Beechman joined us.\
\
\'93Didn\'92t I see you in the caf\'e9 at Delmonico\'92s a few days ago?\'94 said he.\
\'93I was getting my hat and stick in a rush. It certainly looked like\
your back.\'94\
\
\'93It was,\'94 said I. And I was seized with a wild longing to escape from\
him and a wilder longing to hold on to him and to pour out question\
after question.\
\
\'93Mrs. Kirkwood and I were lunching together,\'94 he went on. \'93We talked of\
you. I told her I thought I had seen you, and she said she heard you\
were in town and was much hurt because you hadn\'92t looked her up.\'94\
\
\'93I was merely passing through,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93She has an enormous admiration for you,\'94 continued he. \'93She says you\
have imagination--which means that she thinks you in the small class.\
You know the world divides into sheep and goats on imagination, with\
the mass in the have-not class. I believe it\'92s the true distinction\
between House of Have and House of Have-not.\'94\
\
\'93She is well?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Always. She knows how to take care of herself. I never knew a woman so\
sensible--and sensible means the reverse of what it\'92s usually supposed\
to mean when applied to a woman.\'94\
\
This hardly sounded like an engaged man talking of his fianc\'e9e. On the\
other hand, Beechman was a peculiar chap.\
\
\'93Does she still live in the country?\'94\
\
\'93Just now--yes. Last winter she kept house for Bob in New York.\'94\
\
But you will not be interested in how I drew from him bit by bit a\
hundred details of her life, stories of what she had said and done.\
I saw Beechman several hours every day until he left us at Seattle.\
Alternately I thought him merely her closest man friend and her\
accepted lover. At times I thought he was not quite sure, himself, in\
which position he stood. When we were having our last talk together I\
nerved myself and said:\
\
\'93I heard in London that she was to be married.\'94\
\
I felt him drawing in and shutting all doors and windows.\
\
\'93Have _you_ heard anything of it?\'94 pursued I.\
\
\'93Oh, in the case of a woman like her,\'94 replied he, \'93there\'92s always\
gossip about this man and that.\'94\
\
\'93She ought to marry.\'94\
\
\'93She _will_ marry.\'94\
\
I forced a smile, and, as we knew each other so well, I ventured: \'93You\
speak as one having authority.\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t _you_ know she will?\'94 parried he.\
\
\'93That sounds like evasion,\'94 laughed I.\
\
\'93Not at all. She cannot escape. Some man will convince her--surely.\'94\
\
\'93But so far as you know, no man has?\'94\
\
His eyes were frankly mocking. \'93I did not say that,\'94 said he.\
\
And I could get no further.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
Before I returned to New York in the autumn I had added a lot of far\
western enterprises to my already long list of occupations. Everything\
I touched seemed to succeed. Even my new secretary, Rossiter, proved\
better than Markham. Markham had an indifferent memory and a fondness\
for women that was trying. Rossiter forgot nothing and was as shy of\
the women, including the ladies, as was Lord Blankenship, who yawned\
and retreated at the very sight of a skirt. The news from England was\
altogether satisfactory. An heir was hoped for, and Crossley had become\
a devoted husband and was about to enter politics. This struck me as a\
huge joke, the more so because I knew that in England Crossley would\
be welcomed as a source of real strength to his party. It seemed to me\
amazing how England could stagger along when she was being managed by\
such men and was grateful for it. But when I spoke to Blankenship about\
it, he set me to thinking from a different standpoint.\
\
\'93My son-in-law is going into politics,\'94 said I. \'93In America he couldn\'92t\
be elected dog-catcher.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I fancy money will do most anything most anywhere,\'94 said he.\
\
The news from Paris was equally good. Edna had settled there after a\
joyous summer going from country house to country house in Britain,\
and from ch\'e2teau to ch\'e2teau in France. She had seen one ch\'e2teau which\
she wished me to buy, and she begged me to come over and inspect it.\
She did not explicitly say so, but I read between the lines that she\
was greatly strengthening her social position by giving out that she\
purposed buying a big place. You may imagine how much enthusiasm for\
her such an announcement would create among noble down-at-the-heel\
families eager to exchange unsalable old rook-roosts for American\
dollars. I could hear her talking--how subtly she would put forth the\
suggestion, how diplomatically she would discuss each worthless stone\
heap in turn--and how she would rake in the invitations so difficult to\
get unless one happens to know how, and so easy when one does know.\
\
But with my arrival in New York I had a reverse. A cable came from Edna\
saying that she was sailing at once and wished to see me.\
\
I could not imagine what she wanted, and I did not waste much time in\
making guesses. One evening, when Armitage and I were dining together\
in the Federal Club--Blankenship had sailed for home--the idea flashed\
into my mind that perhaps Edna wanted a divorce. Immediately I felt\
that I had hit upon the precise reason for her coming. You will have no\
difficulty in imagining what was the next idea in my train of thought.\
If she divorced me I should be free to marry whom I pleased!\
\
It was stupid of me, but in all my revolvings of my hopeless love for\
Mary Kirkwood never once had I thought of divorcing my wife. I cannot\
account for this lapse, except as an instance of the universal human\
failing for overlooking the obvious. There was no religious scruple\
in my early training to make me shy of divorce. On the contrary,\
my parents, like most old-fashioned Americans of faiths other than\
Episcopal and Catholic--and Episcopalians and Catholics were few in\
the old American stock, except in New York and Baltimore and South\
Carolina--most old-fashioned Americans believed that living together in\
wedlock without love was sin, that divorce was no mere necessary evil,\
but a religious rite as sacred as marriage itself. A house, they held,\
is either a House of Hate or a House of Love, and no one should remain\
in a House of Hate, and no child should be brought up there.\
\
No doubt, if Edna and I had been living under the same roof the\
idea of divorce would have taken form, actively definite form, long\
before. But we had no home to be a House of Hate. We did not hate\
each other; we bored each other. And as we were not poor, we lived\
far enough apart not to annoy each other in the least. I cheerfully\
paid any ransom she exacted for leaving me free--and you may be sure\
she was not inexpensive. She had her own fortune--and it gave her\
quite an income--but she husbanded that. She insisted upon state and\
equipage, not to mention such small matters as stockings at fifty\
dollars a pair and chemises at three hundred dollars apiece--for,\
she knew how lovely she was and demanded for her beautiful body the\
most beautiful garments that could be devised by French ingenuity at\
combining cost and simplicity. I was--by instinct rather than by avowed\
principles--thoroughly old-fashioned in my family ideas. Indeed, I\
still am; and I say this with no apology. It may be that woman will\
some day develop another and higher sphere for herself. But first she\
would do well--in my humbly heretical opinion--to learn to fill the\
sphere she now rattles round in like one dry pea in a ten-gallon can. I\
want to see a few more women up to the modern requirements for wife and\
mother. I want to see a few more women making a living without using\
their sex charms--a few less \'92tending the typewriter with one eye\
while the other and busier is on the lookout for a husband. I believe\
in emancipation of women--in votes for women--in all that sort of\
thing. The one and only way to learn to swim is in the water. I am sick\
and tired of woman the irresponsible, woman the cozener and milker of\
man, woman the dead weight upon man, and drawing the pay of a housewife\
and shirking all a housewife\'92s duties. So, you see, I am the friend of\
woman--not of woman\'92s vanity and laziness and passion for parasiteism,\
but of woman\'92s education and self-respect and independence.\
\
I was thoroughly old-fashioned. My notion of wife was the independent,\
self-respecting equal of her husband. That is, I had the typical\
American husband\'92s ideal--the ideal that dates from the pioneer days\
of no property and of labor for all, the ideal the American man still\
lives up to, the one that enables woman to betray him. And, having this\
ideal, I never permitted myself--no, not even when I spoke to her the\
contrary in words--I never permitted myself to _feel_ that my wife was\
not in the main what she should be.\
\
If you have borne me company thus far, gentle reader, turn away\
now. For, dreadful things are coming. I said to Armitage: \'93Your\
sister--she\'92s still in the country?\'94\
\
\'93No, she\'92s abroad,\'94 replied he. \'93She\'92s visiting friends in Budapest.\
Later on she\'92s to yacht in the East Mediterranean--she and the Horace\
Armstrongs and Beechman--and--\'94 He gave several names I do not now\
recall.\
\
\'93Is she engaged to Beechman?\'94 I asked carelessly, but the question was\
not one that could sound other than raw.\
\
He smiled--an expression I did not like. At first I thought it a rebuke\
to my impertinence. Afterwards I saw no such notion was in his mind.\
\'93Beechman? Good Lord, no.\'94\
\
\'93You are _sure_?\'94\
\
\'93Absolute. He\'92d not dare go in that direction with _her_.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh--well--you see-- She doesn\'92t care for him,\'94 replied Armitage\
lamely. I was not liking him so well, now that I knew the world--his\
world--better and could judge its beliefs and its hypocrisies more\
accurately.\
\
\'93He\'92s an unusual man,\'94 said I. \'93She might easily care for him.\'94\
\
\'93Well, she doesn\'92t,\'94 retorted he irritably. \'93I happen to know she\
doesn\'92t.\'94\
\
I was convinced. Armitage\'92s tone said in effect that he had heard the\
rumor, had questioned her, had been assured that there was no basis for\
it.\
\
So, she was abroad--five or six days away. I could not go to her and\
make a beginning. Would I have gone if she had been within reach? I do\
not know. I rather think not. As I have said, I was old-fashioned; and\
the sort of love I felt for her, and my sense of what she had suffered\
at the hands of the first man she had trusted would have made me wait,\
I hope, until I was free. Still, love is insidiously compelling. Who\
can say what love would or would not beguile or goad him into doing?\
The old-fashioned man, always reminding himself that women haven\'92t an\
equal chance with men, was inclined to be considerate in his dealings\
with a woman. The new-fashioned man lets her look out for herself. I\
am not sure that he is wrong. Perhaps some who have read thus far will\
guess the reason for my doubt.\
\
You may imagine how impatiently I waited for Edna to arrive. I am\
afraid Rossiter found me difficult in those intervening days. Only\
the weak sort of men and women are easy for an intelligent person to\
live with. Men and women of positive character have their impossible\
moods. I made this remark to Mary Kirkwood on that yachting trip in\
the Sound. And her quick answer was: \'93Yes, that\'92s true. But everything\
worth while is difficult. Weathering the stormy days would have its\
compensations--and more.\'94 What a woman! No wonder I loved her.\
\
When Edna finally arrived----\
\
What an arrival it was! She was attended by two maids, one French, the\
other Italian. She had trained them--she and their former fashionable\
mistresses--to treat her as if she was a royal person, requiring the\
most minute assistance, incapable even of ascertaining for herself\
whether it was daylight or dark, rain or shine. She was clad in the\
latest Paris fashions, adapted and improved for her own especial\
charms. She wore much jewelry, but nothing noisy. There never was\
anything noisy about her--any more than there is about a burst of\
sunshine that fills and floods the whole place, permeating everywhere\
and dominating everything. She talked by turns in English--with a\
superb British accent--in French that sounded Parisian and in Italian\
that seemed as liquid and swift as the Italian maid\'92s. It was a vast\
ship, and there were about a thousand passengers, and much luggage. To\
me, to all on the pier that day, there seemed to be but one landing and\
but one lot of luggage.\
\
How many trunks had she? Heaven only knows. The customs people were\
glad to expedite her after a glance at the exhibit imposing both in\
extent and in costliness. She affected a delightful, most aristocratic\
unconsciousness of the stir she was making, of the excited admiration\
of men, of the gaping or jeering envy of women. Yes, it was a great\
day, and as I accompanied her in the auto to the Plaza, I felt dowdy\
and insignificant--felt like a humble male menial, a courier or valet.\
\
\'93I did not fully appreciate your magnificence,\'94 said I, \'93until I saw\
you on these humble shores.\'94\
\
\'93It is shocking here--isn\'92t it?\'94 said she. \'93So incomplete, so crude. No\
wonder the ideals are low. The surroundings give no inspiration.\'94\
\
\'93None--except for work,\'94 said I. \'93It\'92s a land for working people only.\
No doubt you\'92ll be going back soon?\'94\
\
\'93As soon as I can,\'94 replied she. With a friendly but not tender smile:\
\'93As soon as you\'92ll let me.\'94\
\
The absence of her customary effusiveness confirmed my theory of her\
coming. I had thought all out with the utmost care. I felt it would be\
in every way unwise to let her see that I was eager for the divorce.\
She must open the subject. It had ever been my rule, when I wanted\
anything, so to maneuver that the other person should propose the\
exchange. It is the rule of successful operation in every department of\
life. Therefore, adhering strictly to my prearranged programme, I could\
only sit tight and wait.\
\
How she tried my patience! I was mad to have the preliminaries over,\
to have the divorce under way--mad, not with the hysterical impatience\
of those short-sighted people who mess their purposes through lack of\
self-restraint, but with the white-hot repressed patience of those who\
have their way in this world. Day followed day, and she did not speak.\
I gave up the evenings and a large part of the afternoons to her. I\
stayed on after dinner until there was no further excuse for lingering.\
I listened to her interminable recital of fashionable names, dates,\
gossip, adventure. A week of this, and just as my fortitude was wearing\
itself out and I had begun to debate opening the subject myself, she\
said:\
\
\'93I\'92ve been down looking at our house. Really it\'92s not half bad. Why\
shouldn\'92t we open it?\'94\
\
I did not know what to say. Was I mistaken in her purpose in coming?\
Or was this proposal to open the house the clever move of a clever\
gamester to force me to speak first?\
\
\'93This lovely weather!\'94 she went on. \'93It\'92s a shame such a climate should\
be wasted upon such a vulgar city. When I think of the dreadful rains\
that infest Paris and the rains and fogs of London-- How they would\
glory in this sun and sparkling air.\'94\
\
To my notion New York was vastly more attractive than dreary London or\
rainy, sloppy Paris. But I made no defense of New York. I wished her\
to think it crude and tiresome.\
\
\'93And the fashionable society here,\'94 she went on. \'93What a silly copy of\
the real thing over there!\'94\
\
\'93It must remind you of Passaic,\'94 said I.\
\
She visibly shivered.\
\
I was suddenly seized of a base inspiration. In my despair I did not\
hesitate. Said I: \'93That reminds me. We must go over to see the old\
people.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes,\'94 she murmured. \'93I\'92m so neglectful.\'94\
\
I felt--I saw--that I was on the right track at last. \'93When will you\
go?\'94 I persisted. \'93Next Sunday?\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps,\'94 said she faintly.\
\
\'93Yes, we\'92ll go Sunday. They fret because you never write.\'94\
\
\'93They are well?\'94\
\
\'93In splendid health. There\'92s no reason why all four of them shouldn\'92t\
outlive us.\'94\
\
\'93You--you go often?\'94 she faltered.\
\
\'93I haven\'92t been for some time,\'94 said I. \'93You see, I\'92ve been away.... If\
we opened the house, we could have them visit us. That would make up to\
them for the way we\'92ve acted.\'94\
\
She gazed at me in large-eyed horror. Suddenly she smiled with patient\
scorn and shrugged her shoulders. \'93Oh, I had forgotten your passion for\
jesting.\'94\
\
\'93I am in earnest,\'94 said I--and I was indeed in the full flood of\
a virtuous penitence whose hypocrisy I did not detect until I was\
thinking about the matter afterwards. You, gentle reader, would in\
the same circumstances never have permitted yourself to discover the\
hypocrisy. I went on: \'93I\'92m ashamed of the way I\'92ve acted.\'94\
\
\'93They\'92ve got everything they need or want,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93Material comfort,\'94 replied I. \'93But haven\'92t parents a right to expect\
something more? And now that our social position is secure, we\'92ve no\
excuse for acting snobbishly.\'94\
\
I enjoyed this virtuous talk for itself; still more, I enjoyed teasing\
her. Her delicate, refined, ladylike nerves were aristocratically\
sensitive. Have you observed that peculiarity of lady nerves? A lady\
will live with the most shocking husband for luxury. She will endure\
the most degrading humiliations to get dresses, jewels, motor cars.\
She will crawl in the dirt to gain or to improve social position.\
She will, without a quiver, kiss her worst enemy, cut her dearest\
friends, in the furtherance of any ladylike purpose. But talk to her of\
self-respecting independence, of earning her own living, or of any of\
the homely decencies of life--of her ignorant old parents or unsightly\
poor relatives--and what a fairy princess of high-strung nerves she\
straightway becomes. Yes, Edna was a lady--a perfect lady, as perfect\
as if she had been born to it.\
\
To my surprise I had daunted her only for the day; the following\
afternoon she began again. \'93This heavenly weather!\'94 she exclaimed. \'93It\
tempts me to stay on and on.\'94\
\
\'93I hope it will last over Sunday,\'94 said I.\
\
She ignored the shaft, and went on with undiminished enthusiasm: \'93And\
really New York has improved. In some respects it can be compared to\
Paris--though, of course, it has no background. A city can be built in\
a generation or so. But to build up the country--that takes centuries.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s building up rapidly,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ll be astonished Sunday by the\
change down where the old folks are. The Fosdicks have bought up twenty\
farms or so, and are making a park. I saw Amy Siersdorf not long ago\
and she spoke of having stopped at father\'92s place and got milk and corn\
bread.\'94\
\
\'93The fluffy little cat,\'94 said Edna, not especially ruffled. \'93I shall\
snub her the first time we meet. But I was about to speak of our house.\
I am arranging to open it. Of course, Margot can\'92t come over _this_\
winter, but I don\'92t really need her. We owe it to our friends here to\
do something socially. I want to stop the gossip.\'94\
\
\'93The gossip?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93The talk because we are not living together. It isn\'92t dangerous, but\
it\'92s uncomfortable. I believe people like us ought to maintain the best\
social traditions--ought to set a good example to the lower classes.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, bother!\'94 said I as good-humoredly as I could. \'93We\'92ll do as we\
please. Otherwise, where\'92s the use in having money?\'94\
\
A pause which I felt was hopeful. Edna said with affected carelessness:\
\'93_You_ don\'92t think people have a right to--to divorce?\'94\
\
At last! My intuition had been correct! \'93Why not?\'94 replied I, my tone\
as casual as hers. \'93Certainly, if they wish.\'94\
\
A long silence. Then she: \'93Sometimes I feel that way myself. When\
two people find that they\'92re uncongenial, that they\'92d be better\
off--happier--if free to go their separate ways and to realize to the\
full their own ideals of life-- Why not?\'94\
\
\'93Precisely my view,\'94 said I.\
\
Again a long silence. She finally said: \'93Has it ever occurred to you,\
Godfrey, that you and I might be better off--apart?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93It\'92s a good many years now since we were together,\'94 replied\
I. \'93We might as well be divorced as living the way we do.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s because I\'92ve been feeling those very things, that I\'92ve come\
back,\'94 said she. \'93It seemed to me that, now I\'92ve fulfilled my duty to\
Margot, I ought to do my duty to you.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s like you,\'94 said I. \'93For you life is one long sacrifice.\'94\
\
If she scented irony she dissembled well. \'93Sacrifice is the woman\'92s\
part,\'94 replied she sweetly.\
\
\'93No doubt,\'94 I went on, \'93you\'92re willing to stay here where you\'92re\
unhappy, and for my sake to jam the house night after night with\
people you care nothing about, and disport yourself in splendor to\
make the world envy me. I appreciate your nobility of character, but I\
positively can\'92t allow it.\'94\
\
\'93We must do our duty,\'94 said she. \'93Society expects certain things of us,\
and we must do them.\'94\
\
\'93Not I, my dear. Open the house if you like. But I stick to my bachelor\
apartment.\'94\
\
\'93Do you want me to go back to Europe?\'94 said she with a fine show of\
quiet melancholy.\
\
\'93I want you to do as you please,\'94 was my answer.\
\
\'93But unless I stay here, and you and I take our place in society\
together, I--\'94 She hesitated. \'93Now that Margot is settled,\'94 she went on\
desperately, \'93I am adrift. And--Godfrey, we _can\'92t_ go on as we are.\'94\
\
\'93I see that,\'94 said I. \'93What do you propose?\'94\
\
\'93To stay in New York,\'94 replied she, with the promptness of the skilled\
fencer. \'93To stay here and be the mistress of your establishment.\'94\
\
\'93My establishment is an apartment at Sherry\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93But that\'92s impossible!\'94 remonstrated she.\
\
\'93Be calm, my dear. I don\'92t ask you to lead my kind of life.\'94\
\
\'93Then--what do you propose?\'94 ventured she.\
\
I shrugged my shoulders and settled myself more comfortably in her\
luxurious motor. I gazed with absorbed interest at the bunch of orchids\
in the flower-holder.\
\
\'93I don\'92t see how we can continue neither free nor bound,\'94 pursued she.\
\
\'93Whatever you like,\'94 said I. \'93Only--no fashionable capering for me.\'94\
\
\'93Do you want me to get a divorce, Godfrey?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93I want you to be happy,\'94 said I. \'93Divorce has no terrors for me.\
Aren\'92t we practically divorced already?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s true,\'94 said she. \'93We never did have much in common.\'94 Then she\
reddened--for, she could not quite forget those first days of our\
married life, before I got the money to feed her ambition. \'93You make\
me feel as if you were a--no, not a stranger, but only a friend.\'94\
\
\'93And we _are_ friends,\'94 said I heartily. \'93And always shall be.\'94 For I\
was beginning to like her, to take the amiably indifferent outsider\'92s\
view of her, now that she was freeing me.\
\
\'93Godfrey, do you want to marry again?\'94 she asked with a sudden shrewd\
look straight into my eyes.\
\
I laughed easily. \'93That question might better come from me,\'94 said I.\
\'93You will never be happy, I suppose, until you are the Duchess or\
Princess Something-or-other.\'94\
\
A flush stole over her small sweet face, making it lovelier than ever.\
\'93I never thought of such a thing,\'94 she protested--but too energetically.\
\
\'93Nonsense,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ve dreamed it for years. Be honest with me,\
Edna.\'94\
\
\'93How could I dream it?\'94 replied she. \'93It would take an awful lot of\
money.\'94\
\
\'93You have quite a bunch,\'94 said I. \'93And if we parted, naturally I\'92d give\
you more.\'94\
\
Once again--but this time slowly--the searching gaze turned upon me.\
\
I bore it well. \'93You can\'92t live as I live,\'94 I went on. \'93I won\'92t live\
as you live. You say that means divorce. I don\'92t think so. Many rich\
American couples live apart without divorce. I believe usually the\
reason is the wife has found she couldn\'92t get a large enough slice of\
the husband\'92s fortune, if she divorced him. Still, for whatever reason,\
they stay married. You don\'92t like the idea. So I say, if you want to\
go I\'92ll give you as much as I gave Margot--in addition to what you\
already have--and my blessing. I\'92ve some sentiment about the past, but\
it is as a past.\'94\
\
\'93I am--stunned,\'94 said she. And I think her vanity was.\
\
\'93It\'92s what you want?\'94 rejoined I.\
\
\'93You put me in a hard position, Godfrey. You give me no alternative but\
to accept.\'94\
\
\'93I am a hard man,\'94 said I suavely.\
\
\'93You are really willing to let me go?\'94\
\
\'93You expected to have a difficult time persuading me?\'94 laughed I.\
\
She looked at me reproachfully. \'93Do be serious, Godfrey, about these\
serious things.\'94\
\
\'93All right. What do you say, Edna? Yes or no?\'94\
\
\'93I must have time to think,\'94 replied she. \'93This is a very solemn\
moment.\'94\
\
\'93Why fake?\'94 said I pleasantly. \'93You have it all thought out.\'94\
\
\'93It is solemn to _me_, Godfrey.\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s nothing solemn about our married life. It\'92s a farce.\'94\
\
But she was searching for confirmation of her fear of some kind of\
trap. \'93You really mean that you wish to free me?\'94 she said.\
\
\'93I mean precisely what I say,\'94 replied I. \'93Freedom and the cash are\
yours for the asking. But you must ask, my dear. I\'92ll not have any more\
of your favorite comedy of making yourself out a martyr.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t know how you hurt me,\'94 cried she. \'93But you always have hurt\
me--always. I know--\'94 very gently--\'93that you didn\'92t mean to, but you\
haven\'92t understood.\'94\
\
\'93I did my best,\'94 said I, with the pleasant smile of which she was so\
intolerant. \'93But what can be expected of a plain, coarse materialist of\
a business man?\'94\
\
\'93Yet you are generous in many ways,\'94 mused she. \'93It\'92s simply that you\
can\'92t understand me.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps it\'92s _you_ that don\'92t understand _me_,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93What do you mean?\'94 inquired she.\
\
\'93Oh, nothing,\'94 I replied carelessly. How hope to make a vain woman,\
obsessed of the notion that she has a profound and mysterious soul when\
she simply has a fog-bank--how hope to make her see the truth about\
herself? \'93It isn\'92t worth explaining. Only--when you are free and you\
find some one who appreciates and sympathizes with that soul of yours,\
be careful to pay him well, and to keep on paying. You can always be\
flattered and fooled, if you pay for it. But if you don\'92t pay-- Look\
out. You may hear the truth.\'94\
\
\'93What a cynic you are!\'94 she cried. \'93Thank God, I haven\'92t your low views\
of life.\'94\
\
\'93Keep your views, by all means,\'94 said I. \'93But don\'92t forget my advice.\
You are lovely. You are charming. You dress beautifully and have good\
taste. But it\'92s the money, my dear, that causes the excitement about\
those charms and graces. Hold on to your principal, and spend your\
income freely but judiciously.\'94\
\
\'93If I could only convince you that there is something beside money in\
the world.\'94\
\
\'93Not for those to whom money is the breath of life,\'94 replied I.\
\
When we returned to her hotel she urged me to come in for tea. We went\
into the greenroom, to listen to the music and to observe the crowds.\
There was a sprinkling of men, but two thirds were women--women of\
all classes and conditions, above the working class. Women obviously\
fashionable as well as rich. Women obviously only rich. Women living\
off men respectably. Women \'93trimming\'94 here and there. An army of pretty\
women--well-cared-for bodies, attractive faces, inviting the various\
kinds of sensual attack from the subtlest to the frankest. This woman\
at the next table is rather cheaply dressed, except a gorgeous hat.\
That woman yonder has contrived to \'93trim\'94 only a handsome set of\
furs; it looks grotesque with the rest of the costume. A third has a\
huge gilt bag as her sole claim to sisterhood with the throng of fair\
pampered parasites upon husbands, fathers, lovers. A charming and a\
useless throng. No, not charming, unless a man happens to be in the\
mood in which he succumbs to the trimming process with pleasure--and\
then, he would not think them altogether useless.\
\
\'93New York grows more and more like Europe,\'94 said my wife, gazing around\
with shining eyes, and inhaling the heavily scented atmosphere with\
dilating nostrils. \'93More and more like Europe.\'94\
\
\'93More and more,\'94 replied I. \'93Especially the women.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, they\'92re ahead of the European women,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93So they are,\'94 said I. \'93Yes--they beat the European women at it. But\
I\'92m not sure whether that\'92s because they are really cleverer, or merely\
because our men trim more readily.\'94\
\
She regarded me with an expression of mildly interested perplexity, as\
if she couldn\'92t imagine what was the \'93it\'94 I was talking about. \'93You\
must admit they are lovely,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Admit it?\'94 said I. \'93I proclaim it. If a man\'92s notion of dinner is only\
the dessert, he couldn\'92t do better.\'94\
\
She looked still more vague--one of her tricks when she wished to avoid\
or to ignore. \'93I never touch desserts,\'94 said she.\
\
As I was leaving--for we were not dining together that evening--she\
said:\
\
\'93I shall think about your proposal.\'94\
\
I looked straight at her. \'93Tell me whether you will or will not confirm\
your own proposal,\'94 said I. \'93And don\'92t delay too long. Unfinished\
business makes me nervous.\'94\
\
She returned my look with quiet composure. \'93I shall let you know\
to-morrow,\'94 said she.\
\
\
\
\
X\
\
\
Among my acquaintances, both in and out of fashionable society, there\
were not a few jealous husbands. I knew one man who, in the evening,\
made his wife account for every moment of the day, and tell him in\
detail how she was going to spend the following day, and during\
business hours he called up irregularly on the telephone. He was not\
content with the effective system of espionage which a retinue of\
servants automatically establishes. Another man--to give a typical\
instance of each of the two types--hired detectives from time to time\
to watch his wife living abroad \'93for her health and to educate her\
children.\'94 In a decently ordered society this sort of jealousy is\
rare. Only where the women are luxuriously supported parasites and the\
men are attaching but the one value to the women--the only value they\
possess for them--only there do you find this defiling jealousy the\
rule instead of the exception. Naturally, if the woman is mere property\
the man guards her as he guards the rest of his material possessions;\
and the woman who consents to be mere property probably needs guarding\
if she has qualities of desirability discoverable by other eyes than\
those of her overprizing owner.\
\
This jealousy was in the air of the offices and clubs I frequented.\
But it had somehow or other never infected me. Was I occupied too\
deeply with other matters? Was I indifferent? Did my own disinclination\
to dalliance make me slow to appreciate the large part dalliance now\
plays in American life? I do not know why I was free from jealousy.\
I only know that never once had my mind been shadowed by a sinister\
thought as to what my wife might be about, far away and free. Possibly\
my knowledge of her absorption in social ambition kept me quiet.\
Certainly a woman whose whole mind and heart are set upon social\
climbing is about the last person a seeker for dalliance would invest.\
\
I had never heard a word or a hint of a scandal about her--for the\
best of reasons; she did nothing to cause that kind of talk. But, how\
curious is coincidence! On the very evening of the day of our divorce\
discussion Edna had her first experience of scandal, and I immediately\
knew of it. After leaving her I went to the Federal Club, where I\
often took a hand in a rather stiff game of bridge before dinner. I\
drifted into the reading room, glanced idly at the long row of current\
magazines. In full view lay the weekly purveyor of social news, a\
paper I had not looked at half a dozen times in my life, and then only\
because some one had asked me to read a particular paragraph. The\
week\'92s issue of this scandal monger had just come in. I threw back\
the cover, let my glance drop upon the page. I was hardly aware that\
I was reading--for my thoughts were elsewhere--when I became vaguely\
conscious that the print had some relation to me. I reread it; it was a\
veiled attack upon Edna. All unsuspected by her husband--so the story\
ran--she had come to America to divorce him that she might marry a\
German nobleman of almost royal rank. A voice close beside me said:\
\
\'93What is it amuses you so in that dirty sheet?\'94\
\
It was Armitage. I started guiltily. Then my common sense asserted\
itself, and I pointed to the paragraph. When he had read it I said:\
\
\'93Who\'92s the German? I\'92m not well enough up on the nobility to be able to\
guess, though it\'92s probably plainly told.\'94\
\
\'93The Count von Biestrich,\'94 said he.\
\
\'93Thanks,\'94 said I, no wiser than before, and we went up to play bridge.\
\
A year or so before I might possibly have talked freely with Armitage;\
but the day of our closest intimacy had passed. He was still my\
intimate friend; I was his--with several large reservations. Why?\
Chiefly because when he passed the critical age his mind took the\
turn for the worse. At forty to forty-five a man begins to reap his\
harvest. Armitage had many and varied interests, but the one that\
affected his nature most profoundly was women. He mocked at them; he\
was always inventing or relating stories about them of the more or less\
gamey sort. But, somewhat like his pretensions of disdain for birth\
and fashion, his wordy scorn of women concealed a slavish weakness for\
them. After forty this began to disclose itself in his features. Their\
handsome intellectuality began to be marred by a sensual heaviness; and\
presently his wit degenerated toward a repellent coarseness. It takes\
delicate juggling to make filth attractive. After forty a man does well\
to be careful how he attempts it; for, after forty, the hand loses its\
lightness. I rather avoided Armitage; not that I was squeamish, but\
my sense of humor somehow rarely has responded to rude rootings and\
pawings in the garbage barrel.\
\
About an hour after dinner Edna called me to the telephone and asked me\
to come to her. I found her in high excitement, her color vivid, her\
manner nervous beyond its natural vivacity even as now expanded upon\
the best Continental models. \'93I got rid of my guests,\'94 said she, \'93and\
sent for you as soon as I could. Have you heard?\'94\
\
\'93About von Biestrich?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It is hideous!--hideous!\'94 she cried. \'93I who have kept my name\
unsullied--I who have----\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sure of that,\'94 I interrupted. \'93I\'92m dead tired and, if you\'92ll\
excuse me, I\'92ll go home.\'94\
\
She caught me by the arm. \'93Godfrey, you think this was what I had in\
mind. I swear to you----\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sure you\'92ve been all that a wife is expected to be,\'94 said I, in\
my usual manner of good-natured raillery. \'93And I\'92m also sure you would\
wait until you were free, and would deliberate very carefully before\
deciding----\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey, how can you!\'94 cried she, in her most exaggerated tone for\
outraged spirituality. \'93Have you _no_ heart? Have you no respect for\
me--your wife, the mother of your daughter?\'94\
\
\'93Have I not said I did not suspect you?\'94 remonstrated I. \'93Why so\
agitated, my dear? Do you wish to make me begin to suspect?\'94\
\
She shrank and began to cool down. \'93I\'92ve never had such an experience\
before,\'94 she apologized. \'93I don\'92t know how to take it.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s nothing--nothing,\'94 I declared.\
\
\'93I give you my word of honor that if I were free I should not consider\
marrying that German.\'94\
\
\'93I believe you.\'94 I put out a friendly hand. \'93Good night.\'94\
\
\'93This ends all talk of divorce,\'94 said she.\
\
I dropped my hand. \'93I don\'92t see that the situation is changed in the\
least.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s because you are not a woman,\'94 replied she. \'93You can\'92t\
appreciate how I feel.\'94\
\
\'93You wished to be free before this paragraph appeared. You still wish\
to be free.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, _how_ can you be so insensible!\'94 cried she, all unstrung again\
and, I could not but see, genuinely so. \'93I _never_ could face the\
scandal of a divorce. I didn\'92t realize. It would kill me. How _did_\
Hilda face it?--and all these other nice women? I should hide and never\
show my face again.\'94\
\
She was agitating me so wildly that I felt I could not much longer\
conceal it. \'93I must go,\'94 said I, pretending to yawn. \'93Sleep on it.\
Perhaps to-morrow you\'92ll feel differently.\'94\
\
She tried to detain me, but I broke away and fled. To be almost free\
and then to have freedom snatched away! Not out of reach, but where it\
can be reached easily if one will simply stretch out his hand somewhat\
ruthlessly. By no means so ruthless as my wife had been a score of\
times in gaining her ends without regard to me. Why not be ruthless?\
Had she not been ruthless? Had she not given me the right to compel\
her to free me? More, did she not herself wish to be free? And was she\
not now restrained, not by consideration for me, not by any decent\
instinct whatsoever, but solely by a snobbish groveling fear of public\
opinion?--a senseless fear, too?\
\
We are constantly criticising people--by way of patting ourselves on\
the back--because they take what they want regardless of the feelings\
of others. A form of self-righteousness as shameless as common; for\
we happen not to fancy the things they show themselves inconsiderate\
and swinish about. But--when we really do want a thing--what then? How\
industrious we become in appeal to conscience--that most perfect of\
courtiers--to show us how just and right it is that we should have this\
thing _we_ want! Having set myself drastically to cure self-fooling\
years before--when first I realized how dangerous it is and how common\
a cause of failure and ruin--I was unable to conceal from myself the\
cruelty of forcing Edna to divorce me. My conscience--as sly a sophist\
and flatterer as yours, gentle reader--my conscience could not convince\
me. Cruel things I had never done--that is, not directly. Of course I,\
like all men of action, had again and again been compelled to do them\
indirectly. But not by my own direct act had I ever made any human\
being suffer. I would not begin now. I would not commit the stupidity\
of trying to found my happiness upon the wretchedness of another. I\
could feel the withering scorn that would blaze in Mary Kirkwood\'92s\
honest eyes if I should go to her after having freed myself by force,\
and she should find it out. I see your sarcastic smile, gentle reader,\
as I thus ingenuously confess the selfish fear that was the hidden\
spring of my virtue. Your smile betrays your shallowness. If you knew\
human nature you would know that all _real_ motives are selfish.\
The differences of character in human beings are not differences\
between selfish and unselfish. They are differences between petty,\
short-sighted selfishness and broad, far-sighted selfishness.\
\
When I saw Edna again she was still wavering. She had come to\
America with her mind made up for divorce, if I could by hook or by\
crook be induced to consent. She had been frightened by this attack\
upon her--frightened as only those who live a life of complete\
self-deception can be frightened by a sudden and public holding up of\
the mirror to reflect their naked selves. She was, of course, easily\
able to convince herself that her own motives in seeking a divorce\
were fine and high and self-martyring. But she could now see no way to\
convince others. In the public estimation she saw she would be classed\
with Lady Blankenship, with Mrs. Ramsdell, with all the other women who\
had got divorces to better themselves socially or financially.\
\
Instead of dying out the scandal grew. The daily papers took up the\
hints in the society journal\'92s veiled paragraph, had long cabled\
accounts of Count von Biestrich, of his attentions to Edna, told when\
and where they had been guests at the same ch\'e2teaus and country houses,\
made it appear that they had been no better than they should be for\
nearly a year. Edna was prostrated.\
\
\'93There\'92s only one answer to these attacks,\'94 she said to me. \'93You must\
give up your apartment and move to this hotel. We must open the house\
and live in it together and entertain together.\'94\
\
I was not unprepared. I had threshed out the whole matter with myself,\
had made my choice between the two courses open to me--or, rather, had\
forced myself to see the truth that there was in decency but the one\
course. \'93Very well,\'94 said I to her--and that was all.\
\
I moved to the Plaza the same day; I was seen constantly with her; I\
did my best to show the world that all was serene between us. In fact,\
if you saw us during those scandal-clouded days you may have thought\
us a couple on a honeymoon. Behind the scenes we quarreled--about\
anything, about everything, about nothing--as people do when forced to\
play in public the farce of billing and cooing lovers. Especially if\
one of them has not the faintest glimmer of a sense of humor. But in\
public----\
\
The newspapers soon had to drop their campaign of slander by\
insinuation.\
\
So it came to pass that by the opening of the season Edna and I were\
installed in the big house, decidedly improved now thanks to the\
collecting both of ideas and of things she had done abroad. And we\
were giving all kinds of parties, with me taking part to an extent I\
should have laughed at beforehand as impossible. She had become so\
irritating to me that the mere sight of her put me in a rage. Have you\
ever been forced into intimate daily contact with a nature that is\
thoroughly artificial--after you have discovered its artificiality,\
its lack of sincerity, its vanity and pretense and sex trickery? There\
is, as we all know, in everyone of us a streak of artificiality, of\
self-consciousness, a fondness for posing to seem better than we are.\
But somewhere beneath the pose there is usually a core of sincerity, a\
genuine individuality, perhaps a poor thing but still a real thing. It\
may be there was this reality somewhere in Edna. I can only say that I\
was never granted a sight of it. And I rather suspect that she, like\
most of the fashion-rotted women and men, had lost by a process of\
atrophy through suppression and disuse the last fragment of reality.\
Had Gabriel\'92s trumpet sounded and the great light from the Throne\
revealed the secrets of all hearts, it would have penetrated in her to\
nothing but posing within posing.\
\
I shall get no sympathy from man or woman--or fellow-beast--after\
talking thus of a woman and a lady. It is the convention to speak\
gallant lies to and about women--and to treat them as if they were\
beneath contempt. So my habit of treating them well and speaking the\
truth about them will be condemned and denounced with the triple curse.\
Well--I shall try to live through it.\
\
Except in occasional outbursts when her rude candor toward me would\
anger me into retort in kind, I concealed my feeling about her. I knew\
it was just, yet I was ashamed of it. Our quarrels were all surface\
affairs--outbursts of irritation--the blowing off of surplus steam,\
not the bursting of the boiler and the wrecking of the machinery.\
If you happen to take into your employ any of the servants we had in\
those days--Edna\'92s maids or my valet or any other of the menials so\
placed that they could spy upon our innermost privacy--I am confident\
that in return for your adroit, searching questionings you will hear\
we were no more inharmonious than the usual married couple past the\
best-foot-foremost stage. I did not swear at her; she did not throw\
bric-\'e0-brac at me. And once, I remember, when I had a bad headache she\
stayed home from the opera--on a Monday night, too--to read to me. It\
is true the new dress in which she had expected to show herself was not\
ready. But that is a detail for a cynic to linger upon.\
\
Three months of New York, and she was bored to extinction. I had\
confidently been expecting this. I watched the signs of it with\
gnawing anxiety, for I was very near to the end of my good behavior.\
If possible I wished to stay on and help her toward a rational frame\
of mind--one in which she would see that divorce was the only possible\
solution of our impossible situation. But I began to fear I should\
have to give up and fly--to hunt or to inspect western mines and\
railways. She was bored by the women; they seemed shallow dabblers in\
culture after the European women. She was offended by their nervousness\
about their position; it made them seem common in contrast with the\
Europeans, born swells and impregnably ensconced. She was bored by the\
men--by their fewness, by the insufferable dullness of those few--all\
of them feeble imitations of the European type of elegant loafer.\
\
\'93These men have no subtlety,\'94 she cried. \'93They have no conversation.\
When they\'92re alone with a woman--you should hear them try to flatter.\
They are as different from the European men as--as----\'94\
\
\'93As a fence-painter from an artist,\'94 I suggested.\
\
\'93Quite that,\'94 said she, and I saw her making a mental note of the\
comparison for future use--one of her best tricks. \'93Really, I prefer\
the business men to them. But one cannot get the business men. What a\
country, where everyone who has any brains is at work!\'94\
\
\'93If you are unhappy here, why not go abroad?\'94 said I amiably. \'93Margot\
is always waiting for you.\'94\
\
\'93But how _can_ I go abroad?\'94 railed she. \'93There\'92ll be another outbreak\
of scandal. Was ever a woman so wretchedly placed! What _shall_ I do!\
If I had some one to advise me!\'94\
\
It was interesting to hear her, determined, self-reliant character\
though she was, thus confess to the universal weakness of the female\
sex. Women, not trained to act for themselves, can hardly overcome this\
fundamental defect. That is why you so often see an apparently, and\
probably, superior woman weaken and yield where a distinctly ordinary\
man would be strong and would march ahead. The trouble with Edna was\
that she had no definite man behind her, spurring her on to action. In\
all she had done from the beginning of our married life she had felt\
that she had me to fall back on, should emergency arise--an unconscious\
dependence, one she would have scornfully denied, but none the less\
real. In this affair there was no man to fall back on.\
\
I saw this. Yet I refrained from giving her the support she needed and\
all but asked. Her cry, \'93If I had some one to advise me,\'94 meant, \'93If I\
had some one to give me the courage to act.\'94 I knew what it meant. But\
eager though I was to be quit of her, I would not give her the thrust\
toward divorce that would have put into her the courage of anger and\
of the feeling that she was a martyr to my brutality. Why did I hold\
myself in check? Candidly, I do not know. I distrust the suggestion\
that it may have been due to essential goodness of heart. At any rate,\
I did restrain myself. She--naturally enough--misunderstood; and she\
proceeded to explain it to the gratifying of her vanity. I saw in her\
eyes, in her way of treating me, that she thought me her secret adorer,\
convinced of my unworthiness, of her god-to-mortal superiority; not\
daring openly to resist her desire to be free from me, but opposing\
it humbly, silently. I saw that she pitied me. Did this add to my\
anger? Not in the least. I have a perhaps queer sense of humor. I\
rather welcomed the chance to get a little amusement out of a situation\
otherwise dreary and infuriating.\
\
Curiously enough, it was Armitage who came to her rescue--and to mine.\
\
Bob had been in retirement several weeks, having himself rejuvenated\
by a beauty doctor. You are astonished, gentle reader, perhaps\
incredulous, that a man of his position--high both socially and\
financially--should stoop to such triviality--not a woman but a man.\
And the serious, masculine sort of man he was, I assure you. But you,\
being a confirmed accepter of the trash written and talked about human\
nature, do not appreciate what a power physical vanity is in the\
world. Of course, if you are a man, you know about your own carefully\
hid physical vanity. But you think it in yourself a virtue, quite\
natural, not a vanity at all. Bob Armitage was not vain enough to fail\
to see the beginning of the ravages of time and dissipation. Another\
man would have looked in the glass and would have seen a reflection\
ever handsomer as the years went by, would have discovered in the\
creases and crow\'92s-feet and lengthening wattles a superb beauty of\
manly strength of character showing at last in the face. Bob was not\
that sort of fool. He wished to fascinate the ladies; so, he strove\
to retain the fair insignia of youth as long as he possibly could. He\
knew as well as the next man that his wealth had value with the women\
far beyond any degree of beauty or charm. But like most men he wished\
to feel that he was at least not a \'93winner\'94 in spite of his personal\
self; and his young good looks even helped toward the pleasantest of\
delusions--that he was loved for himself chiefly.\
\
The beauty doctor did well by him, I must say. He looked ten years\
younger, would have passed in artificial light for a youth of thirty\
or thereabouts. He reappeared in his haunts, freshened up mentally,\
too; for physical content reacts powerfully upon the mind, and while it\
is true that feeling young helps one to look young, it is truer that\
looking young compels one to feel young.\
\
With him came a Prince Frascatoni, head of one of the great families\
of Italy, one of the few that have retained German titles and estates\
from the days of the Holy Roman Empire. Frascatoni was sufficiently\
rich for all ordinary purposes, and could therefore pose as a traveler\
for pleasure with no matrimonial designs. He was, in fact, poor for\
a _grand seigneur_ and was on the same business in America that has\
attracted here every other visiting foreigner of rank--except those who\
come for political purposes, and those who come to shoot in the West.\
And those classes give our fashionable society as wide a berth as they\
would its middle-class prototype in their home countries.\
\
The first time I saw Frascatoni--when he and Armitage strolled into\
the reading room of the Federal Club together--I thought him about the\
handsomest and, in a certain way, the most distinguished-looking man\
I had ever seen. He was a black Italian--dark olive skin, coal-black\
hair, dark-gray eyes that seemed black or brown at a glance. They were\
weary-looking eyes; they gazed at you with the ineffable dreamy satiric\
repose of a sphinx who has seen the futile human procession march into\
the grave for countless centuries. He had a slow sweet smile, a manner\
made superior by the effacement of every trace of superiority. He had\
the quiet, leisurely voice of one used to being listened to attentively.\
\
\'93Loring--the Prince Frascatoni. Prince, I particularly wish you to know\
my friend Godfrey Loring. Don\'92t be deceived by his look of the honest\
simple youth into thinking him either young or unsophisticated.\'94\
\
The prince gave me his hand. As it had also been my habit ever since\
I learned the valuable trick merely to give my hand, the gesture\
was a draw. Neither had trapped the other into making an advance.\
We talked commonplaces of New York sky line, American energy and\
business enthusiasm for perhaps half an hour. Then we three and some\
one else, a professional cultivator of millionaires named Chassory,\
I believe, played bridge and afterwards dined together. It came out\
sometime during the evening that Frascatoni had met my wife in Rome\
and in Paris, and that he knew my son-in-law--not surprising, as the\
fashionable set is international, and is small enough to be acquainted\
all round.\
\
Armitage must have told him that my wife and I were not altogether\
inconsolable if we did not see too much of each other. For, the prince,\
taking Edna in to dinner a few nights later, laid siege at once. I\
recall noting how he would talk to her in his quiet, leisurely way\
until she looked at him; then, how his weary eyes would suddenly light\
up with interest--not with ardor--nothing so banal as that--but a\
fleeting gleam of interest that was more flattering than the ardor of\
another man would have been. As Frascatoni, an unusual type, attracted\
me, I saved myself from boredom by observing him all evening. And it\
was highly instructive in the art of winning--whether women or men--to\
see how he led her on to try to make that fascinating fugitive gleam\
reappear in his eyes. I afterwards discovered that he accompanied the\
gleam with a peculiar veiled caress of inflection in his calm, even\
voice--a trick that doubly re\'ebnforced the flattery of the gleam.\
\
\'93What a charming man Prince Frascatoni is,\'94 said my wife, when our\
guests were gone.\
\
\'93Very,\'94 said I. \'93If I were writing a novel I\'92d make him the hero--or\
the villain.\'94\
\
\'93He is one of the greatest nobles in Europe.\'94\
\
\'93He looks it and acts it,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Why, I thought him very simple and natural,\'94 protested she.\
\
\'93Exactly,\'94 said I. \'93So many of the nobles I\'92ve met looked and acted\
like frauds. They seemed afraid it wouldn\'92t be known that they were of\
the aristocracy.\'94\
\
\'93You are prejudiced,\'94 said Edna.\
\
\'93Then why do I size up Frascatoni so well?\'94\
\
\'93You happen to like him.\'94\
\
\'93But I don\'92t,\'94 replied I.\
\
\'93Of course not,\'94 said Edna with sarcasm. \'93He isn\'92t in business.\'94\
\
\'93Precisely,\'94 I answered. \'93He couldn\'92t do anything--build a railroad,\
run a factory, write a book, paint a picture. He and his kind are\
simply amateurs at life, and their pretense that they could be\
professionals if they chose ought to deceive nobody. He probably could\
ride a horse a little worse than a professional jockey, or handle a\
foil almost as well as a fencing master, or play on the piano or the\
violin passably. I don\'92t admire that sort of people, and I can\'92t like\
where I don\'92t admire.\'94\
\
Edna yawned and prepared to go up to her own rooms. \'93I hope he\'92ll stay\
a while,\'94 said she. \'93And I hope he\'92ll let me see something of him. He\'92s\
the first ray of interest I\'92ve had this winter.\'94\
\
\'93You will see something of him,\'94 said I. \'93He liked you.\'94\
\
\'93You think so?\'94 said she, seating herself on the arm of a chair.\
\
\'93I know it. Unless he finds what he\'92s looking for, he\'92ll attach himself\
to you.\'94\
\
\'93What is he looking for?\'94\
\
\'93A very rich wife,\'94 said I. \'93But she must be attractive as well as\
rich, Armitage tells me. Frascatoni doesn\'92t need money badly enough to\
annex a frump. And Armitage says that while Englishmen and Germans and\
the heiress-hunting sort of French don\'92t care a rap what the lady looks\
like, the Italians--of the old families--are rather particular--not\
exacting, but particular. Unless, of course, the fortune is huge.\'94\
\
Edna yawned again. That sort of talk either irritated or bored her.\
\
Frascatoni was constantly with her thenceforth--not pointedly or\
scandalously so; there are discreet ways of doing those things, and\
of discretion in all its forms the Italian was a supreme master. The\
game of man and woman had been his especial game from precocious and\
maddeningly handsome boyhood. He had learned both by being conquered\
and by conquering. They say--and I believe it--that of all the\
foreigners a clean Italian nobleman is the most fascinating.\
\
The Hungarian or Russian is a wild, barbaric love-maker, the German\
a wordy sentimentalist, the Englishman dominates and absorbs, the\
Frenchman knows how to flatter the most subtly, how to make the woman\
feel that life with him would be full of interest and charm. But the\
right sort of Italian combines the best of all these qualities, and\
adds to them the allure of the unfathomably mysterious. He constantly\
satisfies yet always baffles. He reveals himself, only to disclose in\
the inner wall of what seemed to be his innermost self a strangely\
carved door ajar.\
\
My first intimation of what Frascatoni was about came from my wife.\
Not words, of course, but actions. She abruptly ceased quarreling,\
rebuking, reproaching, scoffing. She soothed, sympathized, agreed. She\
became as sweet as she had formerly been. I was puzzled, and waited\
for light. It came with her next move. She began to talk of going back\
to Europe, to deplore that scandalmongers would not let her. She began\
to chaff me on my love of a bachelor\'92s life, on my dislike of married\
life. She said with reproachful, yet smiling gentleness, that I made\
her feel ashamed to stay on.\
\
\'93Admit,\'94 said she, \'93that you\'92d be better pleased if I were in Guinea.\'94\
\
\'93You oughtn\'92t have given me so many years of freedom,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You\'92d have been glad if I had gone on and gotten a divorce,\'94 pursued\
she.\
\
My drowsing soul startled and listened. \'93I was willing that you should\
do as you liked,\'94 said I. \'93Divorce is a matter of more importance to\
the woman than to the man--just as marriage is.\'94\
\
\'93And it\'92s a sensible thing, too--isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
\'93Very,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Godfrey, would you honestly be willing?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92d not lay a straw in your way.\'94\
\
\'93What nonsense we\'92re talking!\'94 cried she, with a nervous laugh. \'93And\
yet there\'92s no denying that we don\'92t get on together. I see how trying\
it is to you to have me about.\'94\
\
\'93And you want to be free and living abroad.\'94\
\
\'93I wonder how much I\'92d really mind the scandal,\'94 pursued she. \'93I don\'92t\
care especially about these New York people. And at the worst what harm\
could they do _me_?\'94\
\
\'93None,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93They could only talk. How they\'92d blame me!\'94\
\
\'93Behind your back, perhaps,\'94 said I. \'93Unless they thought I was to\
blame--which is more likely.\'94\
\
\'93You talk of divorce as if it were nothing.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s merely a means to an end,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ve got only the one life,\
you know.\'94\
\
\'93And I\'92m no longer so _dreadfully_ young. Though, I heard that Armitage\
said the other day he would never dream I was over twenty-eight if he\
didn\'92t know.\'94\
\
She laughed with the pleasure we all take in a compliment that is\
genuine; for she knew as well as did Armitage that she could pass for\
twenty-eight--and a radiant twenty-eight--even in her least lovely hour.\
\
\'93No one has youth to waste,\'94 observed I. \'93In your heart you wish to be\
free--don\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93We are not suited to each other, Godfrey,\'94 said she with gentle\
friendliness.\
\
\'93There\'92s not a doubt of that,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Why should we spoil each other\'92s lives? I conceal it from you, but I\
am so unhappy here.\'94\
\
\'93You can\'92t blame _me_,\'94 said I. \'93I\'92m not detaining you.\'94\
\
A long silence, then she said: \'93Suppose I were to consent--\'94 I laughed,\
she reddened, corrected herself: \'93Suppose we were to decide to do\
it--what then?\'94\
\
\'93Why--a divorce,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Can\'92t those things be done quietly?\'94\
\
\'93Certainly. No publicity until the decree is entered and the papers\
sealed.\'94\
\
\'93Does that mean no scandal beyond just the fact?\'94\
\
\'93No scandal at all. Just the fact, and some newspaper comment.\'94\
\
\'93And we needn\'92t be here.\'94\
\
\'93Not then.\'94\
\
\'93Would it take long?\'94\
\
I reflected. \'93Let me see--if you begin action say within a month, the\
divorce would take-- I could have it pushed through in another month or\
so, and then--by next fall you\'92d be free.\'94\
\
\'93But doesn\'92t one have to have grounds for divorce, beside not wanting\
to be married?\'94\
\
\'93All that easily arranges itself,\'94 said I.\
\
She lapsed into a deep study, I furtively watching her. I saw an\
expression of fright, at the daring of her thoughts, gather--fright,\
yet fascination, too. Said she in a low voice: \'93Godfrey, are you\
_serious_?\'94\
\
\'93Entirely so,\'94 was my careless reply. \'93Aren\'92t you?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t know whether I am or not.... I am _wretched_ here!\'94\
\
\'93All you have to do is to say the word. We don\'92t in the least need each\
other, and mutual need is the only respectable excuse for marriage. And\
I must tell you, I\'92ll not stand for any more of this social nonsense\
that compels me to participate. I\'92m done.\'94\
\
She looked at me pityingly. Our season had been a brilliant success,\
yet I remained unconverted, coarsely unsympathetic. \'93If I should decide\
to--to do it--what then?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing. I\'92d go away. The rest would be for the lawyers.\'94\
\
She looked at me dazedly. \'93I\'92ll see--I\'92ll see,\'94 she said, and went to\
her own part of the house.\
\
A week passed. Frascatoni sailed for home, sending by her his polite\
regrets at not having seen me before his departure. I waited,\
confident. I knew she had a definite goal at last, and, therefore,\
a definite purpose. Aside from the danger of frightening her back\
by showing my own eagerness there was the matter of property. I was\
willing to pay a good round price for freedom. I have always hated\
money wrangles; I had never had one with her, and I did not purpose to\
have. On the other hand, that is, on her side, she would have given me\
short shrift had it not been that she wished a slice of my fortune--and\
a generous slice--to add to her own. I\'92ve not a doubt that the fierce\
social campaign she put me through that winter was not so much for her\
own pleasure, though she delighted in it, as for goading me to demand\
a divorce, and, so, enable her to ease her conscience and to drive a\
better bargain.\
\
My seeming indifference, combined with her now trembling eagerness to\
be free and away, soon forced her hand. The break came on a Sunday\
afternoon. Life is so inartistic--that is, from the standpoint of the\
cheap novelists and playwrights with their dramatic claptrap. Here is\
how the grand crash was precipitated:\
\
Said I: \'93Well, I\'92m off for a few weeks\'92 fishing.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92re not starting now?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Day after to-morrow,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But I\'92ve made several engagements for you.\'94\
\
\'93Get a substitute,\'94 said I. \'93No one will miss me.\'94\
\
\'93How inconsiderate you are!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s pretty good--after all I\'92ve borne this winter.\'94\
\
\'93You are insufferable!\'94 cried she.\
\
\'93Then--why suffer me?\'94 said I coolly.\
\
\'93If you torture me much further, I won\'92t,\'94 retorted she.\
\
\'93I think I\'92ll clear out to-night,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93With people coming to dinner to-morrow! A big dinner!\'94\
\
\'93Yes--to-night,\'94 said I. \'93I had forgotten to-morrow\'92s horrors.\'94\
\
\'93If I were free!\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s easy.\'94\
\
\'93Yes--I _will_ be free!\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll send you a lawyer at eleven to-morrow morning.\'94\
\
She was pale and trembling. The quarrel was a mere pretense--a pretext\
so flimsy that each knew the other was not deceived by it. Her tones of\
anger, my tones of abrupt and contemptuous indifference were obviously\
false and forced. As I left the room I cast a furtive glance at her,\
saw that her daring was so terrifying her that she could hardly keep a\
plausible front of haughty anger.\
\
It was several hours before I could get away from the house, though I\
made all haste. Every moment I expected some word from her. But none\
came. I sent the lawyer the following morning. I was surprised when\
later in the day, by the necessary roundabout way, I learned that she\
had actually consented.\
\
She showed that she had made an exhaustive study of the subject, like\
the wise campaigner she was. She thoroughly understood how to proceed;\
for, she told her lawyer--the one of my lawyers whom I assigned to\
her--that my coldness to her had filled her with suspicion and that she\
wished detectives employed. She needed no coaching whatever; he found\
her prepared on every point.\
\
How far had matters gone between her and Frascatoni? Not so far as you\
imagine; but perhaps farther than I think. Both the husband and the\
world are poor judges in those affairs.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
I shall pass over the suit. It was commonplace throughout. There has\
been much speculation as to the person named by my wife in the sealed\
papers. I can truthfully say that I know as little about that person\
as does the public. It is usually so, I believe, in these arranged\
suits. I did not appear at any of the hearings, all of them held\
secretly. Nor did Edna appear, though I believe that, to comply with\
the forms of law, she made some sort of deposition in the presence\
of the lawyers for both sides. It so happened that the first and\
only public step--the judge\'92s ordering of the decree of divorce--was\
published on the same day with the news of a big prize fight, a\
sensational murder, and a terrific earthquake. So, we got off with\
little public attention. At the time the law provided that a decree\
should not become valid for six months. We were nominally free; but\
actually neither could marry again for six months and meanwhile either\
of us could reopen the case--and she could by merely requesting put an\
end to it and restore her status as my wife. So, I was free--unless\
Edna should change her mind sometime within the six months.\
\
Edna was in London and I in Paris when the news came. Curiously enough,\
as I stood in the doorway of the Ritz restaurant, that evening, looking\
about for a table where I could dine alone, in came Prince Frascatoni\
with another Italian whose name I cannot recall. I bowed to Frascatoni.\
He said:\
\
\'93You are alone, sir?\'94\
\
\'93Unluckily, yes,\'94 replied I.\
\
He introduced his companion and suggested that we three dine at the\
same table. \'93Why not share our dinner?\'94 said he. \'93I can easily change\
my order. Perhaps you will go with us afterwards to some amusing little\
plays in a Montmartre theater?\'94\
\
I accepted the courteous invitation. The situation appealed to my\
sense of humor. Also I knew that Edna--toward whom I now felt most\
kindly--would be delighted to read in the papers: \'93Prince Frascatoni\
had as his guest at dinner last night Mr. Godfrey Loring.\'94 It would\
put an immediate stop to any tendency to gossip. As the prince did not\
speak of my former wife I assumed that he had heard the news.\
\
When we were separating I said: \'93You will dine with me to-morrow night?\'94\
\
\'93Unfortunately I\'92m leaving town in the morning,\'94 said he.\
\
I thought I could guess which way he was journeying. With perhaps a\
twinkle in my eyes, I said: \'93So soon? Well--thank you, and good-by--and\
good luck.\'94\
\
I thought I saw a sardonic smile flit over his face. He probably\
imagined I was in the dark as to his maneuverings and designs and\
smiled to himself as he thought, \'93How differently this American would\
be treating me if he knew!\'94 Do not fancy, because Edna had no charm\
for me, I thought it strange she should have charm for other men.\
Nothing could be further from the truth. I appreciated her attractive\
points perhaps more than any other man possibly could. Also, I\
appreciated--and still appreciate--that another man would not be so\
peculiarly annoyed by her lack of any sense of humor as I was. Indeed,\
had not circumstances forced me into the acutely critical mood toward\
her, I doubt not I could have continued to bear with that lack, though\
it made conversation with her all but impossible and precipitated\
quarrels without number.\
\
Beyond question the strongest and most enduring hold a man can get\
upon a woman or a woman upon a man is the physical. We--even the least\
intellectual of us--are something more than physical; but the physical\
must be contented first, and must remain contented, because we are\
first of all physical. The physical is the fundamental; but it takes\
more than foundations to make a house. And a marriage such as ours was\
could not endure. Each of us had but the one charm for the other. It\
wore itself out like a fire that is not supplied with fuel.\
\
If I had not fallen in love with another woman, there might have\
remained a feeling for Edna that would have made me jealous, perhaps\
domineering toward her. As it was, I viewed her calmly; when I said\
\'93good luck\'94 to Frascatoni, I meant it. I hoped he would make Edna\
happy, for, I wished her well.\
\
Through Armitage I had provided myself with Mary Kirkwood\'92s address--an\
apartment overlooking the Parc Monceau which she and Neva Armstrong had\
taken for the spring months. That very afternoon I went to leave cards.\
As I feared she was not at home. \'93But,\'94 said Mrs. Armstrong, \'93you may\
find her walking in the park with Hartley Beechman.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, is he here?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Naturally,\'94 replied she.\
\
You may picture me as suddenly dashed down by this word whose meaning\
there was no mistaking. If so, you have discovered little about me in\
these pages. Life had made me a competent judge of the situation that\
is really hopeless, the situation where to struggle is folly, and that\
situation which seems hopeless to the small of earth, accustomed to\
defeat in their desires, but seems only difficult to the other sort of\
human beings.\
\
\'93He has taken a studio over in the Latin quarter,\'94 continued Mrs.\
Armstrong. \'93We are all going back together in July.\'94\
\
Mrs. Armstrong is an attractive woman--singularly so for one who\
is obviously wholly absorbed in her husband. She has the sort of\
personality her paintings prepare you to expect. But I had difficulty\
in concealing my impatience to get away. I strolled several times\
through the park, which is not large, before I finally came upon Mary\
and Beechman seated in one of the less-frequented paths. As I was\
moving directly toward them, both saw me at the same instant. Her\
welcoming smile was radiant. I did not notice his, but I assume it was\
more reserved.\
\
Never had I seen her looking so well. You may say what you please,\
but an American woman who knows how to dress, in touch with a French\
dressmaker who is rather artist than dressmaker, is the supreme\
combination for \'e6sthetic beauty. Mrs. Kirkwood, of the ivory skin and\
the coal-black hair, was a thrilling sight to see in her white dress\
and big black hat, with that background of fresh spring foliage and\
late afternoon light. Her eyes and her smile, I noted for the first\
time, had somewhat the same quality as Frascatoni\'92s--the weary eyes,\
the slow sweet smile.\
\
\'93Mr. Loring!\'94 she cried, rising and extending her hand impulsively. \'93I\
thought I was never to see you again.\'94\
\
I hid my emotion and greeted her, then Beechman, in my habitual manner\
which, they tell me, is the reverse of effusive. I suppose, when I am\
deeply moved, its lack of cordiality becomes even more pronounced.\
After a few minutes of the talk necessary among acquaintances who have\
not met in a long time Beechman rose.\
\
\'93You and Beechman will dine with me, I hope?\'94 I said. \'93Mrs. Armstrong\
says she will go if you can.\'94\
\
It was arranged and, as the day was warm, d\'92Armenonville was fixed\
upon as the place. \'93Until half-past eight,\'94 said Beechman as he left.\
Mary and I sat silent watching him walk away. A superb figure of\
young manhood, supremely fortunate in that his body was an adequate\
expression of a strong and simple nature.\
\
As he passed from view at the turn of the walk I transferred my gaze to\
her. Her eyes slowly lowered, and a faint flush came into her cheeks.\
Said I:\
\
\'93You saw the news--about me?\'94\
\
\'93Hartley and I were talking of it as you appeared.\'94\
\
\'93You were not surprised?\'94\
\
\'93Yes--and no,\'94 replied she, with constraint and some confusion. \'93A year\
or so ago I--people thought--you and she had--had drifted apart. Then\
it looked as though you had come together again. It seemed the natural\
thing. She is beautiful and has so much charm.\'94\
\
\'93She was unhappy in America. She wished to be free.\'94\
\
Mary looked at me reflectively. \'93You are not--inconsolable, I see,\'94\
said she with a smile of faint raillery. \'93My brother has often told me\
about you--how indifferent you are to women. Perhaps that is why you\
are attractive to them.\'94\
\
\'93Am I?\'94 said I. \'93I did not know it.\'94\
\
\'93You are terribly impersonal,\'94 she went on laughingly. \'93Last summer\
I--well, I was not--that is, not exactly--trying to flirt with\
you. But your absolute unconsciousness of me as a woman was often\
very--baffling.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93You thought that?\'94\
\
\'93How could I help seeing it? Why, you treated me precisely as if I were\
another man. Not that I didn\'92t like it, on the whole. A woman gets\
tired of being always on guard.\'94 She smiled at herself. \'93That sounds\
horribly conceited. But you know what I mean. The men never lose a\
chance to practice. Then, too--well, if a woman has the reputation of\
being rich she need not flatter herself that it is her charms that do\
all the drawing.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s the supreme curse of money--it all but cuts one off from love\
and friendship. Fortunately it, to a great extent, takes the place of\
them.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t like to hear you say that,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93How many poor people get love and friendship?\'94 replied I. \'93Isn\'92t\
it the truth that there is little--very, very little--real love\
or friendship in the world? All I meant was that money, and the\
independence and comfort and the counterfeit of affection it brings,\
are better than nothing at all.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I see,\'94 said she. \'93You are so sensible--and you don\'92t cant. That\
was why I liked to talk with you. At first I thought you cynical and\
hard. That\'92s the first impression plain good sense makes. We are used\
to hearing only shallow sentimentality.\'94\
\
\'93The unending flapdoodle,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Flapdoodle,\'94 agreed she. \'93Then--I began to discover that you were\
anything but hard--that you looked at people as they are, and liked\
them for themselves, not for what they pretended to be. I was beginning\
to trust you--to venture timidly in the direction of being my natural\
self--when you left.\'94\
\
\'93Well--here I am again,\'94 said I. \'93And we start in afresh.\'94\
\
She smiled with embarrassment. \'93Yes,\'94 she said hesitatingly. \'93But the\
circumstances have changed somewhat.\'94\
\
I know full well now what I should have said. I should have replied,\
\'93Yes--we are both almost free--but soon will be altogether free--I\
in six months, you as soon as you break your engagement.\'94 That would\
have been bold and intelligent--for it is always intelligent to make\
the issue clear at the earliest possible moment. But I did not speak.\
I remained silent. Why? Because as I was talking with her I was\
realizing that I had been deceiving myself in a curious fashion. I had\
been so concentratedly in love with her-- Gentle reader, I see the\
mocking smile on your shallowly sentimental face. You are ridiculing\
a love that could have such restraint as mine--that could bear with\
Edna, could wait, could refrain from any of the familiar much-admired\
impetuosities and follies. You cannot understand. In this day when men\
no longer regard or feel their responsibilities in taking a more or\
less helpless woman to wife, your sense of the decencies is utterly\
corrupted. But let me say that no matter how ardently and romantically\
a man may conduct himself, a woman would do well to take care how she\
trusts him if he has a bad or even a doubtful record as to his way of\
meeting his responsibilities of whatever sort. That kind of love may\
\'93listen good,\'94 but it does not \'93live good.\'94 However--as I was about\
to say when your smile interrupted me, my all-absorbing love for Mary\
Kirkwood had misled me into assuming, with no reason whatsoever, that\
she understood all, that she knew I was eager to come to her, and would\
come as soon as I could. You will say this was absurd. Granted. But\
is not a man in love always absurd? You will say it was egotistical.\
Granted. But is not a man in love always egotistical? It is not the\
realities but the delusions that keep us going; and in those long\
months of waiting, of hoping often against hope, I had to have a\
delusion to keep me going. But now, her friendly, simply friendly, way\
of talking to me made me see that I had her yet to win, that I could\
not speak out directly as I had planned. You, who probably know women\
well, may say that this was a mistake. Perhaps. Nevertheless _I_ could\
not have done otherwise.\
\
You will say that women do not know their own minds, but have to be\
told. I admit it. You will say my silence was timidity. I admit it.\
I could not talk of love to a woman until I was sure she wished to\
hear. I had the timidity of the man to whom woman and love are serious\
matters; the timidity unknown to the man who makes love to every\
passable female at whom he has a chance; the timidity which all women\
profess to approve, but which, I more than suspect, appeals only to\
the jaded palate of the woman who has long made love and passion her\
profession.\
\
As Beechman was busy with a novel I had everything my own way without\
strategy during those following days. There are a thousand attractive\
places to go in and near Paris, and I was resourceful in contriving\
excursions for the days when there was no chance of seeing only her.\
Almost every day the London papers or the Paris _Herald_ printed\
something about Edna and the brilliant season she was having in London;\
often not far away from her name in a list of guests was the name of\
Prince Frascatoni. My own activities, more Bohemian as was my taste\
and the taste of my friends--and I may say the taste of civilized and\
intelligent Paris--my activities were not recorded in the papers. I\
fancied they were unobserved. I was soon to be undeceived.\
\
I wonder who the people are that write anonymous letters--and give\
anonymous \'93tips\'94 to society journals? Every once in a while by\
mischance--often by my having made a remark that was misinterpreted\
into something malicious or low, utterly foreign to my real meaning--I\
have had some fellow-being suddenly unveil a noisome corner in his or\
her soul for confidently awaited sympathy; and I have almost literally\
shrunk back in my horror at the cesspool of coarseness, or at the\
vicious envy. Have you had that experience? No doubt scattered among\
us ordinary folk, neither particularly good nor particularly bad,\
well rather than ill-disposed and amiable, if not too severely tried\
or tempted--no doubt, scattered among us there are not a few of these\
swine souls or snake souls, hid beneath a pleasant smile and fine\
raiment. And these are they who give off the foulness of the anonymous\
letters and the anonymous tip.\
\
In one of the minor London society papers appeared this paragraph which\
I am sure I quote word for word:\
\
  \'93American Paris is much amused these beautifully fine spring days\
  with the ardent love-making of a recently divorced railway \'91baron.\'92\
  The lady is herself a divorcee of several years standing and is\
  supposed to be engaged to a famous young literary man who is all\
  unaware of what is going on.\'94\
\
I know of five copies of this journal that were mailed with the\
paragraph marked. The five were received by Edna, Margot, myself, Mary\
Kirkwood, and Hartley Beechman. I have often mentally gone through the\
list of my acquaintances in search of the person who was responsible\
for this thing. I have some extremely unpleasant characters in that\
list. But I have never been able to suspect who did it. Not improbably\
the guilty person is some one in other respects not a bad sort--for\
almost any given cut from that vast universal, human nature, contains\
something of everything.\
\
I had an engagement with Mary Kirkwood to walk in the Bois and have tea\
the afternoon of the day this paragraph reached me. When I arrived at\
her apartment she came down ready to go. Her costume was so lovely and\
I so delighted in her that I did not immediately note the heavy circles\
round her eyes nor the drawn expression of her mouth. I did not dream\
that she knew of the paragraph. I had read it and had dismissed it\
from my mind. The anonymous letter and the anonymous newspaper attack\
were old familiar stories to me, as they are to every man who attains\
distinction in active life. But as we drove toward the Bois I happened\
to catch a glimpse of her by way of the mirror in the frame of the\
taxi. I saw the evidence of suffering--and the wistful, weary look in\
her beautiful eyes.\
\
\'93What is it?\'94 said I. \'93You have had bad news?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 replied she.\
\
\'93Can I help?\'94\
\
\'93Don\'92t let\'92s talk of it now,\'94 said she. \'93Wait until we are in the\
woods.\'94\
\
Soon after we passed the entrance gates we descended and rambled away\
over the not too even ground, along the indistinct paths under the\
fascinating little trees. It was a gorgeous, perfumed May day. You\
know the Bois--how lovely it is, how artfully it mingles the wild and\
the civilized, suggesting nature as a laughing nymph with tresses half\
bound, half free, with graceful young form half clad, half nude. We\
rambled on and on, and after half an hour seated ourselves where there\
were leaves and the slim graceful trunks on every side and the sound of\
falling water like the musical voice of the sunbeams.\
\
Mary drew a long sigh. \'93I feel better,\'94 she said.\
\
I looked at her. \'93You _are_ better. You have shaken it off.\'94\
\
She met my gaze. \'93This is the last time,\'94 she said. She looked away,\
repeated softly, thoughtfully, \'93the last time.\'94\
\
\'93The last time?\'94\
\
\'93We are not going to see each other any more. It is being\
misunderstood.\'94\
\
I glanced quickly at her, and I knew she had read the paragraph. \'93That\
miserable scandal sheet!\'94 said I. \'93No one sees it--and if they did why\
should we notice anything so ridiculous?\'94\
\
She did not answer immediately. After a while she said: \'93Perhaps I\
ought not to say it, but--Hartley is sensitive. A copy of the paper got\
to him.\'94\
\
\'93One to me. One to you. One to him.\'94\
\
\'93No matter,\'94 said she. \'93The mischief is done.\'94\
\
\'93You do not give up a friend lightly,\'94 rejoined I. The time to speak\
was at hand; I welcomed it.\
\
\'93_He_ has asked me to give you up,\'94 said she simply. \'93And I shall do\
it.\'94\
\
\'93But he has no right to ask such a thing,\'94 protested I.\
\
\'93Yes--he has. He and I are engaged--you knew that?\'94\
\
\'93I imagined there was some sort of an engagement,\'94 said I, still\
waiting for the right opening.\
\
\'93There is only one sort of engagement possible with me,\'94 replied she,\
with a certain gentle reproach.\
\
\'93I know that,\'94 said I. \'93But I remember the talk we had on the yacht.\'94\
\
A flush overspread her paleness for a moment. Then she rose from the\
little rustic iron chair. \'93We must go,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Wait,\'94 said I. And I made a tactless, a stupid beginning: \'93You can\'92t\
deny that you do not love him.\'94\
\
She turned coldly away and walked on, I following. \'93I think I\'92ll not\
stop for tea,\'94 she said. \'93Will you hail the first taxi we meet?\'94\
\
\'93You are offended--Mary?\'94 I said. What a blundering fool love does make\
of a man!--unless he makes a fool of it.\
\
She shook her head. \'93No--not offended. But when a subject comes up\
about which we may not talk there is nothing to do but drop it.\'94\
\
In my desperation I reached for the right chord and struck it. \'93Do you\
know,\'94 said I, \'93why I left the yacht abruptly?\'94\
\
She halted, gave me a swift, frightened glance. The color flooded her\
face, then fled.\
\
\'93Yes--that was why,\'94 said I. \'93And--I\'92ve come as soon as I could.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, why, why didn\'92t you _tell_ me?\'94 cried she. Then, before I could\
answer, \'93I don\'92t mean that. I understand.\'94 Then, with a wild look\
around, \'93_What_ am I saying?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve come for you, Mary,\'94 I went on. \'93And you are not going to rush\
into folly a second time--a greater folly. For--you do not love\
him--and you will care for me. You are right, we can\'92t discuss him--you\
and him. But we can, and must, discuss you and me.\'94\
\
\'93I shall not see you again,\'94 said she, looking at me with tranquil eyes\
that would have daunted me had I not known her so well, understood her\
so well--which is only another way of saying, had I not loved her so\
well.\
\
\'93Why have you been seeing me day after day, when you knew that I loved\
you----\'94\
\
\'93I did not know it,\'94 replied she. \'93I did not think I could move you in\
the least--beyond a friendly liking.\'94\
\
An inflection in her voice made me suddenly realize. \'93You came because\
it made you happy to come!\'94 I cried triumphantly. I caught her hand.\
\'93You do care, Mary!\'94\
\
She drew her hand away resolutely. \'93I shall keep my promise,\'94 she said\
coldly. \'93I wish to hear no more.\'94\
\
\'93You will not keep your promise. If necessary I\'92ll go to him and tell\
him--and he\'92ll release you.\'94\
\
She gave me a look that withered. \'93You--do a cowardly thing like that!\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said I. \'93But _you_ will ask him to release you. You have no right\
to marry him. And I--I love you--and must live my life with you, or--I\
can think of nothing more futile and empty than life without you. And\
your life--would it not be futile and empty, Mary, if you tried to live\
it without me, when we might have been together? Together!--you and I!\
Mary, my love!\'94\
\
\'93Why do you say those things, Godfrey?\'94 she cried passionately. \'93To\
make me wretched? To make it harder for me to do what I must?\'94\
\
\'93To make it impossible for you to do what you must not. Marry a man\
you don\'92t love--marry him when you love another! You\'92d be doing him\
the worst possible injury. No matter how much he loves you, he can\
recover from the blow of losing you. But the day to day horror of such\
a loveless marriage would destroy you both. He is a sensitive man. He\
would feel it, in spite of all your efforts to pretend. You--pretend!\
You could not do it.\'94\
\
\'93After what has passed between him and me--the promises we\'92ve\
exchanged--the plans we\'92ve made--there is no going back! I don\'92t wish\
to go back. I----\'94\
\
\'93Mary--I love you!\'94 I cried. \'93I love you--and you love me. That\'92s the\
wall between you and any other man, between me and any other woman.\'94\
\
She had waved to a passing taxi. It swept into the edge of the drive.\
She opened the door. \'93You are not coming with me,\'94 she said. \'93And I\
shall not see you again.\'94\
\
I laid my hand on her arm and forced her to meet my gaze. \'93You are\
hysterical now,\'94 I said. \'93But you will be calm, and----\'94\
\
She gave me a cold smile--it would have deceived those who do not\
understand the temperaments that can conceal themselves. \'93I am\
perfectly calm, I assure you,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93As you were the first time we ever met,\'94 said I. \'93You\'92ve no\
right to marry any man but me, Mary. If you did you\'92d be wronging\
yourself--me--him most of all. That is the truth, and you will see it.\'94\
\
She dragged her arm away, burst into violent sobs, sank upon the seat\
of the cab. I hesitated--obeyed a right instinct, closed the door,\
gave her address to the ignoring chauffeur, stood watching the cab\
whisk away. I was shaking from head to foot. But I had no fear for the\
outcome. I knew that I had won--that _we_ had won.\
\
\
\
\
XI\
\
\
Rossiter--I believe I have mentioned the name of my new secretary--was\
lying in wait for me at the hotel entrance. He read me a telegram from\
Margot: Edna was ill, was not expected to live, begged me to come at\
once.\
\
I wrote to Mary Kirkwood--a brief repetition of what I had said to\
her--\'93of what I know both your intelligence and your heart are saying\
to you, dear.\'94 I told her that Edna was desperately ill and had sent\
for me, and that I should be back as soon as I could get away. I went\
on to say many things such as a man deeply in love always says. No\
doubt it was a commonplace letter, as sincere love letters are apt\
to be; but because it was from my heart I felt that, for all the\
shortcomings, it would go to her heart. I admit I am not a facile\
love-maker. I have had little practice. And I suspect, those who are\
facile at love-making have got their facility by making love speeches\
so often when they were not in earnest that they cannot but have lost\
all capacity to be in earnest.\
\
Toward noon the next day Rossiter and I and my valet were set down at\
the little station of Kesson Wells, half an hour out from London in\
Surrey. We were in the midst of about as beautiful a country us I have\
seen. I am a narrow enough patriot not to take the most favorable\
view of things foreign. But I must admit that no other countryside can\
give one the sense of sheer loveliness that one gets in certain parts\
of England. I am glad we have nothing like it at home; for to have it\
means rainy weather most of the time, and serf labor, and landlord\
selfishly indifferent to the misery of the poor human creatures he\
works and robs. Still, I try to forget the way it came in the joy of\
the thing itself--as you, gentle reader, forget the suffering and death\
of the animals that make the artistic and delicious course dinners you\
eat.\
\
We were received with much ceremony at the station. My money was\
being exercised by those who knew how to do it. After a drive between\
perfumed and blossoming hedgerows and over a road as smooth and clean\
as a floor we came to Garton Hall, the place my son-in-law had leased\
until his new house should be ready. It was a modern house, as I\
noted with relief when we were still afar off, and while not large,\
was a most satisfactory embodiment of that often misused and often\
misunderstood word comfort. To live in the luxurious yet comfortable\
comfort obtainable in England only--indoors, in its steam-heated or\
Americanized portions--one must have English servants. I am glad we do\
not breed English servants in America; I am glad that when they are\
imported they soon cease to be the models of menial perfection they\
are at home. But when I am in England I revel in the English servant.\
To find him at his best you must see him serving in the establishment\
of a great noble. And my son-in-law was that; and the establishment\
over which Margot presided, but with which she was not permitted to\
interfere in the smallest detail because of her utter ignorance of all\
the \'93vulgarities\'94 of life, as became a true lady of our quaint American\
brand--the establishment was a combination of the best of the city with\
the best of the country, a skillful mingling of the most attractive\
features of home, club, and hotel.\
\
My first question at the station had, of course, been as to Mrs.\
Loring. I was assured that her ladyship\'92s mother was somewhat better,\
but still awaiting the dangerous crisis of the fever. Margot, not a\
whit less girlish for her maternity, met me in the doorway, and had the\
nurse there with the boy--the Earl of Gorse. They said he looked like\
me--and he did, though I do not believe they thought so. Why should\
they say it? I was still a young man and might marry again. I fancy\
the same prudent instinct prompted them to give him Godfrey as one of\
his four or five names. Why do I think they did not believe he looked\
like me? Because all of them were ashamed of everything American. In\
the frequent quarrels between Margot and Hugh, he never failed to use\
the shaft that would surely pierce the heart of her vanity and rankle\
there--her low American birth, in such ghastly and grotesque contrast\
to the illustrious descent of her husband. She had an acid tongue\
when it came to quarreling; she could hurl taunts about his shifts\
to keep up appearances before he met her that made ugly and painful\
marks on his hide. She had discovered, probably by gossiping with some\
traitor servant, that he had been flouted by a rich English girl for\
a chauffeur--and you may be sure she put it to good use. But nothing\
she could say made him quiver as she quivered when he opened out on the\
subject of those \'93filthy bounders in the States.\'94\
\
Do not imagine, gentle reader, that my daughter was unhappily married.\
She would not have exchanged places with anyone but the wife of a duke;\
and Hugh--well, he needed the money. Nor should you think that they\
lived unhappily together. They saw little of each other alone; and in\
public they were as smiling and amiable with each other as--perhaps as\
you and your husband.\
\
A fine baby was the Earl of Gorse--one who in a decent environment\
would have grown up a sensible, useful person. But hardly, I feared,\
when he was already living in his own separate apartment, with his\
name--\'93The Earl of Gorse\'94--on a card beside the door, and with all the\
servants, including his mother, treating him as if he were of superior\
clay. This when he barely had his sight. They say a baby learns the\
utility of bawling at about three days old; I should say the germ of\
snobbishness would get to work very soon thereafter.\
\
You are waiting to hear what was the matter with Edna. No, it was not\
a fake illness to draw me within reach for some further trimming.\
She had indeed fallen dangerously ill--did not expect to live when\
Margot telegraphed me. It was an intestinal fever brought on by the\
excesses of the London season. I wonder when the biographers, poets,\
playwrights, novelists, and other gentry who give us the annals of the\
race will catch up with the progress of science? How long will it be\
before they stop telling us of germ and filth diseases as if they were\
the romantic physical expressions of soul states? There was a time when\
such blunders were excusable. Now, science has shown us that they are\
so much twaddle. So, gentle reader, I cannot gratify your taste for\
humbug and moonshine by telling you that Edna was stricken of remorse\
or of overjoy or of secret grief or of any other soul state whatever.\
The doctor bosh was, of course, nervous exhaustion. It always is if\
the patient is above the working class. The truth was that she fell\
ill, even as you and I. She ate and drank too much, both at and between\
meals, and did not take proper care of herself in any way. She wore\
dresses that were nearly nothing in cold carriages and draughty rooms,\
when she was laden with undigested food. Vulgar--isn\'92t it? Revolting\
for me to speak thus of a lady? But I am trying to tell the truth,\
gentle reader, not to increase your stock of slop and lies which you\
call \'93culture.\'94 And if a lady will put herself in such a condition,\
why should it not be spoken of? Why go on lying about these things,\
and encouraging people to attribute to sensitive nerves and souls the\
consequences of gluttony, ignorance, and neglect?\
\
I am not criticising Edna for getting into such an internal physical\
state that a pestilence began to rage within her. The most intelligent\
of us is only too foolish and ignorant in these matters, thanks to\
stupid education from childhood up. And she has the added excuse of\
having been exposed to the temptations of a London season. She fell; it\
is hardly in human nature not to fall.\
\
You have been through a London season? It is a mad chase from food to\
food. You rise and hastily swallow a heavy English breakfast. You ride\
in the Row a while, ride toward a lunch table--and an English lunch,\
especially in the season, means a bigger dinner than any Frenchman or\
other highly civilized person ever willingly sat down to. Hardly is\
this long lunch over before it is time for tea--which means not merely\
tea, but toast, and sandwiches, and hot muffins, and many kinds of\
heavy cake, and often fruit or jam. Tea is to give you an appetite for\
the dinner that follows--and what a dinner! One rich, heavy course upon\
another, with drenchings of wine and a poisonous liqueur afterward.\
You sit about until this has settled a bit, then--on to supper! Not so\
formidable a meal as the dinner, but still what any reasonable person\
would call a square meal. Then to bed? By no means. On to a ball, where\
you eat and drink in desultory fashion until late supper is served.\
You roll heavily home to sleep. But hardly have your eyes closed when\
you are roused to eat again. It is breakfast time, and another day of\
stuffing has begun.\
\
Starvation, they tell me, is one of the regular causes of death in\
London. But that is in the East End. In the West End--and you, gentle\
reader, are interested only in that section--death, I\'92ll wager,\
reaps twenty from overfeeding to one he gets in the East End through\
underfeeding. Famine is a dreadful thing. But how characteristic of the\
shallowness of human beings it is that you can make a poetic horror\
out of famine, when no one would listen while you told the far more\
horrible truth of the frightful ravages of overfeeding, chief cause\
of all the diseases that torture and twist the human body, aging and\
killing it prematurely.\
\
Edna had been for many years most cautiously careful of her health. She\
loved her youth, her beautiful body. She fought against her natural\
fondness for food and wine. I fancy that, for this first season after\
freedom she relaxed her rules, and turned herself loose to \'93celebrate.\'94\
I know she must have had something of this sort in mind, because her\
French maid--I could not talk with the Italian--told me that madame had\
arranged an elaborate programme of \'93cures\'94 on the Continent after the\
season. \'93And they were to be serious cures,\'94 said she.\
\
Her illness took such a course of ups and downs, with death always\
hovering, that it was impossible for me to leave. I wrote Mary; I got\
no reply. I sent Rossiter to Paris; he reported that Mrs. Armstrong\
and Mrs. Kirkwood had left for the country, but that he could get no\
address.\
\
You probably picture me as scarcely able to restrain myself from acting\
like a madman. How little you know of me! Do you think I could have\
achieved my solid success before I reached forty-five years if I had\
been one of the little people who fret and fume against the inevitable?\
All men who amount to anything are violent men. Jesus, the model of\
serenity and patience, scourged the money changers from the temple.\
Washington, one more great exemplar of the majesty of repose, swore\
like a lunatic at the battle of Monmouth. These great ones simply\
had in the highest form the virtues that make for success in every\
department of leadership. Certainly, I am a violent man; but I have\
rarely been foolish enough to go crazy to no purpose.\
\
What could I do but wait? And over that beautiful, quiet country place\
floated the black cormorant, with wings outspread and hollow, burning\
eyes bent eagerly downward. I waited, not in fury, but oppressed by a\
deep melancholy. For the first time in my life I was thinking seriously\
of death. To any man no decisive event of life is so absolutely\
unimportant as his own death. I never have wasted, and never shall\
waste, a moment in thinking of my death. It may concern others, but how\
does it concern me? When it comes I shall not be there. The death of\
another, however--that is cause for reflection, for sadness. I knew,\
as did no one else, how intensely Edna loved life, how in her own way\
of strain and struggle she enjoyed it. And to me it was pitiful, this\
spectacle of her sudden arrest, her sudden mortal peril, as she was\
about to achieve the summit of her ambition.\
\
I wondered as to Frascatoni. I pictured him waiting, with those\
tranquil, weary eyes already looking about for another means to his aim\
of large fortune should this means fail. There I misjudged him; for,\
one day as I stood in a balcony overlooking the drive he came rushing\
up in a motor, and my first glance at his haggard face told me that\
he loved her. In a way it is small compliment to a woman to be loved\
by the fortune-hunting sort of man; for, he does not release himself\
until he has the permit of basest self-interest. But Frascatoni,\
having released himself, had fallen in love with all the frenzy of his\
super-refined, passionately imaginative nature.\
\
After a few minutes he drove away. I do not know what\
occurred--naturally, they would not speak of his call and I did not ask\
questions. I can imagine, however. She seemed better that day, and he\
must have gone away reassured. He was sending, every morning, enormous\
quantities of flowers; such skill and taste showed in the arranging\
that I am sure it was not the usual meaningless performance of rich\
people, who are always trying to make money-spending serve instead of\
thoughtful and delicate attention.\
\
Nearly a month dragged along before she was able to see me. As I have\
explained, her beauty was not dependent upon evanescent charms of\
contour and coloring, but was securely founded in the structure of her\
head and face and body. So, I saw lying weakly in the bed an emaciated\
but lovely Edna. Instantly, on sight of her, there came flooding back\
to me the memory of the birth of Margot, our first child--how Edna\
had looked when they let me go into the humble, almost squalid little\
bedroom in the flat of which we were so vain. She was looking exactly\
so in this bed of state, in this magnificent room with the evidences of\
wealth and rank and fashion on every side. She smiled faintly; one of\
the slim weak hands lying upon the cream-white silk coverlet moved. I\
bent and kissed it.\
\
\'93Thank you for being here,\'94 she murmured, tears in her eyes. Her lips\
could scarcely utter the words.\
\
\'93You must not speak, your ladyship,\'94 warned the nurse. To flatter\
Americans and to give themselves the comfortable feeling of gratified\
snobbishness English servants address us--or rather our women--as if we\
had titles.\
\
\'93You are to get well rapidly now,\'94 I said.\
\
\'93You\'92ll stay until I can talk to you?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 I said--what else could I say?\
\
They motioned me away. I had committed myself to several weeks more of\
that futile monotony--and I no longer had the restraint of the sense\
that she might die at any moment.\
\
Even had I been willing to break my promise I could not have done so;\
for she would have me in every morning and every afternoon to look at\
me, and they told me that if I were not there to reassure her, it would\
undoubtedly cause a change for the worse. I stayed on and wrote to Mary\
Kirkwood--all the time with the fear that my letters were not reaching\
her, but also with the unshakable conviction that she was mine. You\
smile at this as proof of my colossal vanity. Well, your smile convicts\
you of never having loved. The essence of love is congeniality.\
Appetite is the essence of passion--which, therefore, has no sense of\
or especial desire for mutuality. Passion is as common as any other\
physical appetite. Love is as rare as are souls generous enough to\
experience or to inspire it. The essence of love is congeniality--and\
I _knew_ there was a sympathy and understanding between me and Mary\
Kirkwood that made us lovers for all time.\
\
There came a day--how it burned into my memory!--when Edna was well\
enough to talk with me. Several days before and I saw that it was not\
far away, and I awaited it with fierce impatience; she would tell me\
why she had sent for me and I should be free to go. It was one of those\
soft gray days of alternating rain and sun that are the specialty of\
the British climate. Edna, with flowers everywhere in her sitting room,\
was half reclining in an invalid chair, all manner of rich, delicate\
silk and lace assistants to comfort, luxury and beauty adorning her\
or forming background for her lovely face and head. I do not think\
there is a detail of the room or of her appearance that I could not\
reproduce, though at the time I was unaware of anything but her\
voice--her words.\
\
I entered, seated myself in the broad low window opposite her. She\
looked at me a long time, a strange soft expression in her weary\
eyes--an expression that disquieted me. At last she said:\
\
\'93It is so good to be getting well.\'94\
\
\'93And you are getting well rapidly,\'94 I said. \'93You have a wonderful\
constitution.\'94\
\
\'93You are glad I am better, Godfrey?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93What a foolish question.\'94\
\
\'93I didn\'92t know,\'94 said she. \'93I feared-- I have acted _so_ badly toward\
you.\'94\
\
\'93No indeed,\'94 replied I. \'93Don\'92t worry about those things. I hope you\
feel as friendly toward me as I do toward you.\'94\
\
\'93But you have always been good to me--even when I haven\'92t deserved it.\'94\
\
This was most puzzling. Said I vaguely, \'93I guess we\'92ve both done the\
best we could. Do you want to tell me to-day why you sent for me? Or\
don\'92t you feel strong enough?\'94\
\
\'93Yes--I wish to tell you to-day. But--it isn\'92t easy to say. I\'92m very\
proud, Godfrey--and when I\'92ve been in the wrong it\'92s hard for me to\
admit.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, come now, Edna,\'94 said I soothingly. \'93Let\'92s not rake up the past.\
It\'92s finished--and it has left no hard feeling--at least not in me.\
Don\'92t think of anything but of getting well.\'94\
\
She lay gazing out into the gentle rain with the sunshine glistening\
upon it. A few large tears rolled down her cheeks.\
\
\'93There\'92s nothing to be unhappy about,\'94 said I. \'93You are far on the way\
to health. You are as lovely as ever. And you will get everything you\
want.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, it\'92s so hard to tell you!\'94 she sighed.\
\
\'93Then don\'92t,\'94 I urged. \'93If there\'92s anything I can do for you, let me\
know. I\'92ll be glad to do it.\'94\
\
She covered her eyes with her thin, beautiful hand. \'93Love me--love me,\
Godfrey--as you used to,\'94 she sobbed.\
\
I was dumbfounded. It seemed to me I could not have heard aright. I\
stared at her until she lowered her hand and looked at me. Then I\
hastily glanced away.\
\
\'93I\'92m sorry for the way I\'92ve acted,\'94 she went on. \'93I want you to take me\
back. That was why I sent for you.\'94\
\
I puzzled over this. Was she still out of her mind? Or was there some\
other and sane--and extremely practical--reason behind this strange\
turn?--for I could not for an instant imagine she was in sane and\
sober earnest.\
\
\'93You don\'92t believe me!\'94 she cried. \'93No wonder. But it\'92s so, Godfrey. I\
want your love--I want _you_. Won\'92t you--won\'92t you--take me--back?\'94\
\
Her voice sounded pitifully sick and weak; and when I looked at her I\
could not but see that to refuse to humor her would be to endanger her\
life. I said:\
\
\'93Edna, this is an utter surprise for me--about the last thing I\
expected. I can\'92t grasp it--so suddenly. I--I-- Do you really mean it?\'94\
\
\'93I really mean it, dear,\'94 she said earnestly.\
\
It was evident she, in her secret heart, was taking it for granted\
that her news would be welcome to me; that all she had to do in order\
to win me back as her devoted, enslaved husband was to announce her\
willingness to come. I have often marveled at this peculiar vanity of\
women--their deep, abiding belief in the power of their own charms--the\
all but impossibility of a man\'92s ever convincing a woman that he does\
not love her. They say hope is the hardiest of human emotions. I doubt\
it. I think vanity, especially the sex vanity both of men and of women,\
is far and away hardier than even hope. I saw she was assuming I would\
be delighted, deeply grateful, ardently responsive as soon as I should\
grasp the dazzling glad tidings. And she so ill and weak that I dared\
not speak at all frankly to her.\
\
She stretched out her hand for mine. I slowly took it, held it\
listlessly. I did not know what to do--what to say.\
\
\'93It is so good to have you again, dear,\'94 she murmured. \'93Aren\'92t you\
going to kiss me?\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t understand,\'94 I muttered, dropping her hand and standing up to\
gaze out over the gardens. \'93I am stunned.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ve been cruel to you,\'94 she said with gracious humility. \'93Can you\
ever forgive me?\'94\
\
\'93There\'92s nothing to forgive. But--\'94 There I halted.\
\
\'93I\'92ll make up for it, dear,\'94 she went on, sweetly gracious. \'93I\'92m not\
surprised that you are stunned. You didn\'92t realize how I loved you. I\
didn\'92t myself. I couldn\'92t believe at first when I found out.\'94\
\
\'93You are not strong enough to talk about these things to-day,\'94 said I.\
\'93We\'92ll wait until----\'94\
\
She interrupted my hesitating speech with a laugh full of gentle\
gayety. \'93You\'92re quite wrong,\'94 said she. \'93I\'92m not out of my mind. I mean\
it, dear--and more. Oh, we shall be _so_ happy! You\'92ve been far too\
modest about yourself. You don\'92t appreciate what a fascinating man you\
are.\'94\
\
I\'92m sure I reddened violently. I sat, rose, sat again. \'93You\'92ve given me\
the shock of my life,\'94 said I, with an embarrassed laugh. \'93I\'92ll have to\
think this over.\'94 I rose.\
\
\'93No--don\'92t go yet,\'94 said she, with the graciousness of a princess\
granting a longer interview. \'93Let me tell you all about it.\'94\
\
\'93Not to-day,\'94 I pleaded. \'93You must be careful. You mustn\'92t overtax\
yourself.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, but _this_ does me good. Sit near me, Godfrey, and hold my hand\
while I tell you.\'94\
\
I felt like one closeted with an insane person and compelled to humor\
his caprices. I obediently shifted to a seat near her and took her hand.\
\
\'93You could never guess how it came about,\'94 she went on.\
\
As she was looking inquiringly at me, I said, \'93No.\'94\
\
\'93It was very strange. For the first few weeks after the divorce--no,\
not the divorce--but the decree--for it isn\'92t a divorce yet, thank\
God!--for the first weeks I was happy--or thought I was. I went early\
and late. I had never been so gay. I acted like a girl just launched in\
society. I was in ecstasies over my freedom. Do you mind, dear? Does it\
hurt you for me to say these things?\'94\
\
\'93No--no,\'94 said I. \'93Go on.\'94\
\
\'93How queer you are! But I suppose you are dazed, poor dear. Never mind!\
When I am better--stronger, I\'92ll soon convince you.\'94 And she nodded and\
smiled at me. \'93Poor dear! How cruel I have been!\'94\
\
\'93Yes--we\'92ll wait till you are stronger,\'94 stammered I, making a move to\
rise.\
\
\'93But I must tell you how it came about,\'94 she said, detaining me. \'93All\
of a sudden--when I was at my gayest--I began to feel strange and\
sad--to dislike everyone and everything about me.\'94\
\
\'93It was the illness working in you,\'94 said I.\
\
She gave the smile of gentle tolerance with which she received my\
attempts at humor when she was in an amiable mood. \'93How like you that\
is! But it wasn\'92t the illness at all. It was my inmost heart striving\
to force open its door and reveal its secret. Do be a little romantic,\
this once, dear.\'94\
\
\'93Well--and then?\'94\
\
\'93Then--a paragraph in one of the society papers. Some one sent it to me\
anonymously. Was it you, dear?--and did you do it to make me jealous?\'94\
\
She spoke as one who suddenly sees straight into a secret. \'93I didn\'92t,\'94\
said I hastily. \'93It never entered my head to think you cared a rap\
about me.\'94\
\
\'93Now, don\'92t tease me, Godfrey, dear. You must have been making all\
sorts of plans to win me back.\'94\
\
\'93You read the item in the paper?\'94 suggested I.\
\
\'93Oh, yes--I must finish. I read it. And at first I shrugged my\
shoulders and said to myself I didn\'92t in the least care. But I couldn\'92t\
get the thing out of mind. Godfrey, I had always been too sure of you.\
You never seemed to be a single tiny bit interested in other women. So\
the thought of you and another woman had not once come to me. That item\
put it there. You--_my_ husband--_my_ Godfrey and another woman! It was\
like touching a match to powder. I went mad. I----\'94\
\
She was sitting up, her eyes wild, her voice trembling. \'93You must not\
excite yourself, Edna,\'94 I said.\
\
\'93I went mad,\'94 she repeated, so interested in her emotions that she\
probably did not hear me. \'93I rushed down to Margot. I fell ill. I made\
her telegraph for you. Oh, how I suffered until I knew you were here.\
If you hadn\'92t come right away I\'92d have cabled to my lawyer in New York\
to have the divorce set aside--or whatever they do. I can have it set\
aside any time up to the end of the six months, can\'92t I?\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 admitted I, though her tone of positive knowledge made my reply\
superfluous.\
\
She seemed instinctively to feel a suspicion--an explanation of her\
amazing about-face--that was slowly gathering in my bewildered mind.\
She drew from the folds of her negligee a note and handed it to me. She\
said:\
\
\'93I haven\'92t confessed the worst I had done. Read that.\'94\
\
\'93Never mind,\'94 said I. \'93I don\'92t wish to know.\'94\
\
\'93But I wish you to know,\'94 insisted she. \'93There mustn\'92t be anything dark\
between us.\'94\
\
I reluctantly opened the note and read. It was from Prince\
Frascatoni--not the cold bid for a break that my suspicion expected\
but a passionate appeal to her not to break their engagement and throw\
him over. I could by no reach of the imagination picture that calm,\
weary-eyed man of the world writing those lines--which shows how ill\
men understand each other where women are concerned.\
\
\'93He sent me that note the day I came here,\'94 said she. \'93I did not answer\
it.\'94 Her tone was supreme indifference--the peculiar cruelty of woman\
toward man when she does not care.\
\
\'93You were engaged to him?\'94 said I--because I could think of nothing\
else to say.\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 said she. Then with the chaste pride of the \'93good\'94 woman, \'93But\
not until after the decree was granted. He would have declared himself\
in New York, but I wouldn\'92t permit _that_. At least, Godfrey, I never\
forgot with other men that I was your wife--or let them forget it. You\
believe me?\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m sure of it,\'94 said I.\
\
She gazed dreamily into vacancy. \'93To think,\'94 she mused, \'93that I\
imagined I could marry him--_any_ man! How little a woman knows her own\
heart. I always loved you. Godfrey, I don\'92t believe there is any such\
thing as divorce--not for a good woman. When she gives herself\'94--in a\
dreamy, musical voice, with a tender pressure of my hand--\'93it is for\
time and for eternity.\'94\
\
Never in all my life had I so welcomed anyone as I welcomed the\
interrupting nurse. I felt during the whole interview that I was under\
a strain; until I was in the open air and alone I did not realize how\
terrific the strain. I walked--on and on, like a madman--vaulting gates\
and fences, scrambling over hedges, plowing through gardens, leaping\
brooks--on and on, hour after hour. What should I do? What _could_ I\
do? Nothing but wait until she was out of danger, wait and study away\
at this incredible, impossible freak of hers--try to fathom it, if it\
was not the vagary of a diseased mind. I wished to believe it that,\
but I could not. There was nothing of insanity in her manner, and from\
beginning to end her story was coherent and plausible. Plausible, but\
not believable; for I had no more vanity about her loving me than has\
the next man when he does not want the love offered him and finds it\
inconvenient to credit, and so is in the frame of mind to see calmly\
and clearly.\
\
I wandered so far that I had to hire a conveyance at some village\
at which I halted toward nightfall. As soon as I was at the house I\
ordered my valet to pack, and wrote Edna a note saying that neglected\
business compelled me to bolt for London. \'93But I\'92ll be back,\'94 I wrote,\
at the command of human decency. \'93I feel that I can go, as you are\
almost well.\'94 Half an hour later I was in the train for London.\
\
A letter, feebly scrawled, came from her the next day but one--a brief\
loving note, saying that she understood and that I knew how eagerly she\
was looking forward to my return--\'93but don\'92t worry, dearest, about me.\
I shall soon be well, now that my conscience is clear and all is peace\
and love between us. I know how you hate to write letters, but you will\
telegraph me every day.\'94\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
How I got through those next few weeks I cannot tell. I had no sense of\
the reality of the world about me or of my own thoughts and actions.\
Every once in a while--sometimes when I was talking with the men\
whose company I sought, again when I was alone in bed and would start\
abruptly from sleep--I pinched myself or struck myself violently to\
see if I was awake. Edna\'92s letters were daily and long. I read them,\
stared at them, felt less certain than ever of my sanity or of my being\
awake. I sent her an occasional telegram, dictated to Rossiter--a vague\
sentence of congratulation on her better health or something of that\
kind. Soon this formality degenerated to a request to Rossiter: \'93And\
telegraph Mrs. Loring.\'94 Or he would say, \'93Shall I send Mrs. Loring a\
telegram?\'94 and I would reply, \'93Yes--do please.\'94\
\
It was obviously necessary that I should not see her before she was\
well enough to be talked to frankly. I invented excuses for staying\
away until my ability in that direction gave out. Then Rossiter, best\
of secretaries, divining my plight, came to the rescue. I gave him\
a free hand. He went too far, created in her predisposed mind the\
illusion that I was champing with impatience at the business that\
persisted in keeping me away from her. I do not blame him; he took the\
only possible course.\
\
At last she was completely restored. The doctors and nurses could find\
no pretext for lingering, and that in itself was proof positive of her\
health and strength. She was having her meals with the family, was\
attending to her correspondence, was alarmed because she was taking on\
flesh so rapidly. She began offering to join me in London. When she\
wrote that she was starting the next day I telegraphed her not to come;\
and, after four more days of delay on various excuses, I went down. I\
should have liked to postpone this interview a week or ten days. Again\
I see you smiling at me, posing as madly in love with Mary Kirkwood yet\
able to put off the joy of being free to go to her. But, gentle reader,\
you must not forget that I had first to deal with Edna. And, from what\
you have learned of her, do you think I was wise or foolish to wish to\
meet her only when she could not possibly prevent candor by pleading a\
remnant of invalidism?\
\
She was charmingly dressed to receive me, rushed forward before them\
all and flung her arms around my neck in a graceful, effusive fashion\
she had learned on the Continent. I received the shock as calmly\
as I could, noting the awkwardly concealed surprise of Margot and\
Hugh. We had lunch; she did most of the talking--a gay, happy-hearted\
rattling--the natural expression of a woman with not a care in the\
world. And I-- In spite of myself I felt like an executioner come to\
assassinate an unsuspicious and innocent victim. For the best side of\
her was to the fore, and all the unpleasant traits were so thoroughly\
concealed that they seemed to have been burned up in that terrible\
fever. I _knew_ they were still there, but I could not _feel_ it.\
\
When we were alone in her sitting room, she said:\
\
\'93Where\'92s your valet and your luggage?\'94\
\
\'93In London,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh, they\'92re coming on a later train.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said I, seizing this excellent opportunity. \'93I\'92m going back this\
afternoon.\'94\
\
She gave a cry of dismay. \'93Godfrey!\'94 she exclaimed. \'93Isn\'92t it a shame!\'94\
Then, rushing to the bell, \'93I\'92ll have my things got ready. I\'92ll go back\
with you. You shan\'92t be left alone, dearest.\'94\
\
I seated myself. \'93Don\'92t ring,\'94 I said. \'93Wait till we\'92ve talked the\
matter over.\'94\
\
\'93I see you can\'92t really believe--even yet,\'94 cried she laughingly. \'93I\
must convince you.\'94 And she rang the bell.\
\
\'93When your maid comes, send her away,\'94 said I. \'93Don\'92t order her to\
pack. You can\'92t go with me.\'94\
\
She looked at me anxiously. \'93How solemn you are!\'94 she cried. \'93Has\
something gone wrong in that business?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing,\'94 said I. The maid came, was sent away. Edna moved toward me,\
would have sat in my lap or on the arm of my chair had I not prevented\
her by rising on the pretext of lighting a cigarette.\
\
\'93You are very--very--strange,\'94 said she. Then advancing toward me and\
gazing into my face, \'93Godfrey, there wasn\'92t any truth in that item--was\
there?\'94 She looked like a sweet, lovely slip of a girl, all tenderness\
and sincerity.\
\
\'93I\'92ve come to discuss our affairs--not malicious newspaper gossip,\'94\
said I, fighting for my usual manner of good-humored raillery. \'93First,\
tell me what is the meaning of this outburst of affection for me?\
Aren\'92t you satisfied with the settlements?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, Godfrey, what a cynic you are!\'94 laughed she. Then with an air of\
earnestness that certainly was convincing, she said: \'93Can\'92t you _feel_\
that I love you?\'94\
\
\'93I cannot,\'94 replied I blandly. \'93On the contrary, I _know_ that you care\
nothing about me. So let\'92s talk business as we always have.\'94\
\
She did not rave and vow and swear. She did not show the least\
excitement. She seated herself and, fixing upon me a look which I can\
only describe as tenacious, she said:\
\
\'93Whether you believe me or not, I love you. And I shall not give you\
up.\'94\
\
My internal agitation instantly cleared away. I am always nervous about\
crossing a bridge until my foot touches it; thenceforth I am too busy\
crossing to bother about myself. \'93Well--what do you propose?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93To be your wife,\'94 replied she. \'93To show you how sorry I am for the\
way I have acted, to show you by thinking only of making you happy.\'94\
\
\'93Yes? And what will you _do_ to make me happy?\'94\
\
\'93Look after your comfort--your home, Godfrey.\'94\
\
\'93But you don\'92t know about that sort of thing,\'94 said I. \'93You know only\
how to make a house attractive to other people. You are far too fine\
for a private housekeeper.\'94\
\
\'93I shall learn,\'94 said she sweetly. \'93Those things are not difficult.\'94\
\
I smiled at this unconscious confession of incapacity to learn the most\
difficult of all the arts. \'93You will practice on me, eh? Thank you--but\
no. You wouldn\'92t make me comfortable. You\'92d only harass yourself and\
deprive me of comfort--and for years. \'91Those things\'92 are less easy than\
you imagine. You are set in your ways, I in mine.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t realize,\'94 protested she confidently. \'93You must be lonely,\
Godfrey. You need companionship--sympathy. I can give it to you\
now--for, I am awake at last. I know my own mind and heart.\'94\
\
I shook my head. \'93That sounds well, but what does it _mean_? Next\
door to nothing, my friend. You and I are not interested in the same\
things. We\'92ve nothing to talk about. I don\'92t know the things you\
know--the social, the fashionable side of life. You don\'92t know my side\
of life--and you couldn\'92t and wouldn\'92t learn enough to interest me.\
Any forced interest you might give would bore me. Pardon my frankness,\
but this is no time for polite falsehoods. The fact is we\'92ve outgrown\
each other. When we look out of our eyes, each of us sees an entirely\
different world; and neither of us cares about or even believes in the\
other\'92s world. We talk, only to irritate. We are absolutely and finally\
apart. It would be impossible for us to live together.\'94\
\
She waited until I finished. I doubt if she listened. It was her habit\
not to listen to what she did not wish to hear. \'93Godfrey--Godfrey!\'94 she\
cried, battling with the sobs that rose, perhaps in spite of her. \'93Do I\
mean nothing to you--I who have been everything to you? Does the word\
wife mean nothing to you?\'94\
\
\'93You mean nothing to me,\'94 replied I. \'93And I mean nothing to you. Let us\
not pretend to deceive ourselves.\'94\
\
\'93But you did care about me once,\'94 she pleaded. \'93I am not old and faded.\
I still have all the charms I used to have--yes, and more. Isn\'92t that\
so, dear?\'94\
\
\'93You are more beautiful than you ever were,\'94 said I. \'93But--you\'92ve\
gotten me out of the habit of you. And I couldn\'92t go back to it if I\
would.\'94\
\
She buried her face in her hands and wept.\
\
\'93At your old tricks,\'94 said I impatiently. \'93It has always been your way\
to try to make me seem in the wrong. As a matter of fact, you lost\
years ago--lost before I did--all interest and taste for our life\
together. It was you who ended our married life, not I.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, it was all my fault,\'94 she sobbed. \'93Forgive me, dear. Take me\
back. Don\'92t cast me off. I\'92ll be whatever you say--do whatever you\
wish. Only take me back!\'94\
\
I could not make an inch of progress toward the real motive behind this\
obviously sincere plea. As I sat silent, looking at her and puzzling,\
she began to hope that she had moved me. No--rather, she began to feel\
stronger in her deep rooted conviction that at bottom I loved her and\
had never wavered. She came across the room, dropped to her knees\
beside my chair and hid her face in my lap. Why is it that passion once\
extinguished can never light again? As she knelt there I appreciated\
all her physical charms; but I was appreciative with that critical\
calmness which is the absence of all feeling. I laid my hand on hers.\
\
\'93Edna,\'94 I said, \'93what _is_ the meaning of this?\'94\
\
\'93I am telling you the truth, Godfrey,\'94 replied she, lifting her\
gold-brown eyes to gaze at me. \'93As God is my judge, I am telling you\
the truth.\'94\
\
\'93No doubt you think you are,\'94 said I diplomatically. \'93But your good\
sense must tell you that there\'92s something wrong.\'94\
\
\'93Yes--with you,\'94 was her answer in a sad tone. \'93I hoped we could begin\
to be happy at once. I see now that I\'92ve got to win you back.\'94\
\
I concealed my panic behind an amused laugh. \'93I suppose I\'92ve misled\
you into forming this poor estimate of my intelligence where you are\
concerned,\'94 said I. \'93You have thought all these years that, because I\
said nothing, I did not understand. The truth is, for many years I have\
understood you thoroughly, Edna. You doubt it. You say to yourself,\
\'91If he had understood, he would have been furious and would not have\
allowed me to use him as a mere pocketbook.\'92\'94\
\
Up she started, wounded to the quick. \'93Godfrey!\'94 she cried. \'93How you\
hurt! Oh, my dear--spare me. If you had such a low opinion of me, don\'92t\
tell me about it. Perhaps I deserve your contempt. God knows, I thought\
I was doing right. Don\'92t be harsh with me, dearest. I am only a woman,\
after all.\'94\
\
I shook my head smilingly. \'93Drop it,\'94 said I. \'93You are entirely too\
strong a person to be able to hide behind a plea of weakness. I have\
let you use me for your own selfish pleasure all these years because\
I did not especially care. Also, it kept you away from me--which was\
highly agreeable to us both.\'94\
\
The anguish in her eyes, whether it was genuine or not, looked so\
sincere that I avoided her gaze.\
\
\'93But,\'94 I went on, \'93I\'92m no longer in the mood to be used. You got\
through with me, as you thought, and divorced me and prepared to marry\
a man more to your liking----\'94\
\
\'93Godfrey--you needn\'92t be jealous of him--of anyone!\'94\
\
I made a gesture of resigned despair. Jealous! Her vanity rampant.\
It had seized upon an insignificant phrase and had found what it was\
eagerly looking for. \'93I am not jealous of him,\'94 said I, \'93though it\
would be useless for me to try to convince you. Still, I repeat--I\
am not jealous. I was merely saying that you have cast me off, that\
I choose to regard your action as final, that I shall not let you\
fasten on me again simply because your selfishness and vanity happen to\
discover a new value in me. Do I make my position clear?\'94\
\
\'93I see I can\'92t convince you of what\'92s in my heart,\'94 said she with sweet\
resignation. \'93I had no right to expect it--to hope for it. But my life\
will convince you, Godfrey. I shall win you back!\'94\
\
I retained my appearance of calmness. But I was the reverse of calm.\
I appreciated that she had me in her power. So far as I could judge,\
she was not after more money, but was under the spell of some form of\
hysteria that gave her the delusion of an actual desire to love me and\
to be loved by me. As she had a fortune in her own right, and a large\
one, I was without means of controlling her. I could not compel her to\
stick to her bargain and make the divorce legally final; and, even if I\
had been so disposed I had no ground for a divorce from her unless she\
should be consenting and assisting.\
\
\'93If you cared for another woman, I might despair,\'94 she went on. \'93But\
you don\'92t. My heart tells me that you don\'92t.\'94\
\
Should I tell her? I strangled the impulse as it was born; my common\
sense lost no time in reminding me of the folly of that course.\
\
\'93I\'92ll be so utterly yours, Godfrey,\'94 she went on, \'93that you\'92ll simply\
_have_ to love me.\'94\
\
I rose. \'93Let\'92s have no more of this nonsense,\'94 said I. \'93Understand,\
once for all, Edna, the day when you can use me is past--gone forever.\
You are free--and so am I. We will annoy each other no more.\'94\
\
She faced me, her bosom heaving, her widening eyes scrutinizing me.\
And what I saw in them made me quail. For there shone the arch-fiend\
jealousy. \'93Godfrey!\'94 she exclaimed at last. \'93It must be another woman!\'94\
\
I laughed--not pleasantly, I imagine. \'93Is there no end to your vanity?\'94\
said I.\
\
\'93Another woman,\'94 she repeated dazedly. \'93If that weren\'92t true you\
couldn\'92t treat me harshly--you would want me back--would love me----\'94\
\
\'93If there were not another woman on earth, I would not go back to you,\'94\
said I.\
\
But what woman would believe that of a man--especially of one upon whom\
she had put her private brand? She said in the same slow ferocious way:\
\'93Some woman has hold of you--is getting ready to make a fool of you.\'94\
\
I laughed--nervously watching her mind dart from woman to woman of\
those we knew.\
\
\'93Ah--you can\'92t deceive me!\'94 she cried. \'93Mary Kirkwood! She has been\
stealing you away from me. And you, a fool like all men where women are\
concerned, can\'92t see through her.\'94 Edna laughed wildly. \'93But she has\
_me_ to reckon with now. I\'92ll show her!\'94\
\
\'93Mrs. Kirkwood is engaged to Hartley Beechman,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93A nobody of a novelist,\'94 said Edna. \'93That\'92s a mere blind. She\'92s after\
_you_. After _my_ husband--the man _I_ love! We\'92ll see!\'94\
\
Again I laughed--and I am sure my counterfeit of indifference was\
successful. \'93Have it your way,\'94 said I. \'93But the fact remains that you\
and I are done with each other.\'94\
\
\'93I shall set aside the divorce,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93As you please,\'94 replied I, lighting a cigarette and preparing to leave\
the room. \'93If you are not content with the terms of settlement you can\
have more money. If that----\'94\
\
\'93Why _do_ I love you?\'94 cried she, all softness and piteous appeal\
again. \'93You who are so base that you think only of money! What weakness\
for me to love you! Yet, God help me, I do--I do! Godfrey----\'94\
\
\'93I am going back to London,\'94 said I.\
\
She stretched out her arms, and her face was a grief-stricken appeal\
for mercy. \'93You can\'92t be so cruel to me--your Edna.\'94\
\
I smiled mockingly at her and left the room.\
\
\
\
\
XII\
\
\
I have not been unaware of your anger and disgust with me, gentle\
reader, during the progress of the preceding scene. In real life--in\
your own life--you would have understood such a scene. But you are\
not in the habit of reading realities in books--real men, real women,\
real action. Everything is there toned down, put in what is called an\
artistic perspective. Well, I am not an artist, and perhaps I have no\
right to express an opinion upon matters of art. But I\'92ll venture. To\
me art means a point of view upon life; so, I see nothing artistic,\
nothing but more or less grotesque nonsense, in an art that is not a\
point of view but a false view. But to keep to Edna and myself.\
\
You think I should have been moist and mushy, should have taken her\
back, should have burdened myself for the rest of my days with her\
insincere and unsympathetic personality. You are saying: \'93But after\
all she loved him.\'94 Even so--what does the word love mean when used\
by a person of her character? It means nothing but the narrowest,\
blighting selfishness. She had for years used me without any thought\
for or of my feelings, wishes, needs. When we moved into our grand New\
York house she gave me as a bedroom the noisiest room in the house,\
one overlooking the street where the rattling of carriages, cabs, and\
carts and the talk and laughter of pedestrians kept me awake until far\
into the night and roused me about four in the morning--this, when I\
was working with might and main all day long and needed every moment\
of rest I could get. Why did she give me that room? Because she wanted\
the only available quiet room--beside her own bedroom--for a dressing\
room! She said the light in the room she gave me was unfit to dress\
by! I thought nothing of all this at the time. It is characteristic of\
American wives to do these things; it is characteristic of American\
men to regard them as the matter of course. I cite the small but not\
insignificant incident to show the minuteness of her indifference\
to me. I have already given many of the larger though perhaps less\
important instances, and I could give scores, hundreds, in the same\
tenor. She professed to love me at that time--and she either had\
or simulated a very ardent passion. But that was not love, was it?\
Love is generous, is considerate, finds its highest pleasure of\
self-gratification in making the loved one happy. Such a conception of\
love never entered her head--and how many American women\'92s heads does\
it enter? How it amuses me to watch them as they absorb everything,\
give nothing, sit enthroned upon their vanities--and then wonder and\
grow sulky or sour when their husbands or lovers tire of the thankless\
task of loving them and turn away--or turn them away.\
\
If Edna had awakened to genuine love, gentle outraged reader, would\
she not have been overwhelmed with shame as she looked back upon her\
married life? Would she have come to me with the offer of her love\
as a queen with the offer of her crown? She would not have indulged\
in empty words; she would have tried to _do_ something by way of\
reparation. She would not have demanded that she be taken back; but,\
feeling that she had forfeited her rights, she would have tried to find\
out whether I would consent to take her back; and if she had found that\
I would not, she would have accepted her fate as her desert.\
\
In those circumstances do you think I could have laughed at her and\
remained firm? No one not a monster could have done that.\
\
But the thing she called love was not love at all, was merely as I\
described it to her--a newly discovered way of using me after she had\
thought all possible use for me exhausted. Such, gentle reader, is\
the simple truth. Yet because I had intelligence enough to see the\
truth and firmness enough not to be swayed by shallow and meaningless\
sentimentalities, you call me hard, harsh, cruel. One of your impulsive\
kindly souls would have taken her weeping to his arms, would have\
begun to live with her. And there the novel would have ended, with\
you, gentle reader, all tears and thrills. For, having no imagination,\
you would have been unable to picture the few weeks of cat-and-dog\
life after the \'93happy ending,\'94 then the breaking apart in hatred and\
vindictiveness. But this is not an \'93artistic\'94 novel. It is a story of\
life, a plain setting forth of actualities, in the hope that it may\
enable some men and women to understand life more clearly and to live\
their own lives more wisely and perhaps less mischievously.\
\
I went to my daughter. \'93Margot,\'94 said I, \'93your mother threatens to try\
to stop the divorce. It is best for both her and me that we be free. I\
am determined not to live with her again, for I abominate the sort of\
life she and you lead. If you will do what you can to bring her to her\
senses, I will see that you don\'92t regret it.\'94\
\
Margot rather liked me, I believe. Not as a father; as a father I made\
her ashamed, like everything else American about her. But it was a\
resigned kind of shame, and she appreciated my money, my good nature\
about it and my services in bringing back her marquis and making\
possible her son the earl. I knew I could count on her active sympathy;\
for she would vastly prefer that her mother be the Princess Frascatoni.\
\
My mother, Mrs. Loring; my mother, the Princess Frascatoni. Pronounce\
those two phrases, gentle reader, and you will grasp my meaning.\
\
I was by no means sure she would have any influence with her mother,\
even though she was now the wife of one marquis and the mother of a\
marquis to be, with about half the high British peerage as relatives.\
But I was desperate, and a desperate man clutches at anything.\
\
\'93I think you are right, papa,\'94 said she in her mother\'92s own grave sweet\
way. \'93You and mamma never have been suited to each other. Besides, I\
don\'92t want her away off in America where I never expect to be again.\
Some of the girls who have married here like to go back there and\
receive the flattery and the homage. But it seems cheap to me. I\'92m sure\
I don\'92t care what the Americans think of me. I\'92m not snobbish, as I\
used to be. I am English now--loyal English to the core.\'94\
\
\'93This is the place for your mother, too.\'94 An idea occurred to me. \'93If\
I took your mother back with me, I would have my parents and hers live\
with us in a big place I\'92m going to buy in the country. You don\'92t know\
your grandparents well?\'94\
\
She was coloring deeply. She must have heard more than her mother\
dreamed she knew. \'93No, papa,\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Your mother and I were disgracefully neglectful of them,\'94 pursued I.\
\'93But I shall make up for it, as far as I can. I wish you would come\
over and visit us.\'94\
\
\'93I should like it, papa,\'94 murmured she, ready to sink down with shame.\
\
\'93They are plain people,\'94 I went on, \'93but they are good and honest--much\
ahead of these wretched parasites you\'92ve been brought up among.... Talk\
to your mother about them. Tell her what I have said.\'94\
\
She understood thoroughly; that is the sort of thing fashionable people\
always understand. \'93I shall, papa,\'94 said she. And I could see her\
putting on a fetching air of sweet innocence and telling her mother.\
\
\'93And if she does not like it,\'94 continued I--\'93can\'92t bear the scandal and\
ridicule among her fashionable friends--why, she can desert me. And\
that would give me ground for divorce.\'94\
\
\'93She would be dreadfully unhappy over there,\'94 said Margot.\
\
\'93I am sure of it,\'94 said I, and my accent was a guarantee.\
\
Should I see Edna again and picture our life together in the house of\
love she was bent upon? I decided against it. Margot\'92s pictures might\
lack the energy and detail of mine. They would more than make up in\
bringing home to her the awful reality, as she would believe Margot\
where she might suspect me of merely threatening what I would never\
carry out. So, off I went to London--to wait.\
\
About the hardest task in this world is inaction when every fiber of\
your being is clamorous for action. Yet I contrived to sit tight--for\
a week--for two weeks. I have always regarded myself as too impatient,\
too impetuous. And, beyond question, my natural tendency is to the\
precipitate. But looking back over my life I am astonished--and not a\
little pleased with myself--as I note how I have held myself in check,\
have confined my follies of rash haste to occasions when miscarriage\
was not a serious matter.\
\
Armitage came--on the way from St. Moritz to America. As soon as I\
could command the right tone, I said:\
\
\'93You\'92ve seen your sister and Mrs. Armstrong? How are they?\'94\
\
\'93All right,\'94 replied he indifferently. \'93Motoring in Spain at present, I\
believe.\'94\
\
\'93Beechman--he\'92s with them?\'94\
\
\'93No. He\'92s somewhere hereabouts, I believe. I saw him in Hyde Park the\
other day--looking as seedy as if he were pulling out of an illness. I\
spoke and he stared and scowled and nodded--like the bounder that he\
is.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t care for him?\'94 said I, rejoiced by this news of my rival\'92s\
seediness.\
\
\'93Oh, one doesn\'92t bother to like or dislike that sort of chap.\'94 He said\
this in a supercilious manner--a manner he had never had in the earlier\
period of our acquaintance. How the inner man does poke through the\
surface when the veneer of youth wears thin!\
\
\'93For one who despises birth and wealth and rank,\'94 said I, not without a\
certain malice, \'93you have a queer way of talking at times.\'94\
\
Armitage winced, changed the subject by saying: \'93And what the devil\'92s\
the matter with _you_? You\'92re looking anything but fit yourself.\'94\
\
\'93Oh--I\'92m up against it, as usual,\'94 said I gloomily.\
\
He laughed. My pessimism was one of the jokes of my friends. But,\
having seen so much of the ravages of optimism--of the cheer-boys-cheer\
and always-look-at-the-bright-side sort of thing, I had given myself\
the habit of reckoning in the possibilities of disaster at full value\
when I made plans. Little people ought always to be optimistic. Then,\
their enthusiasm--_if_ directed by some big person--produces good\
results, where they would avail nothing could they see the dangers in\
advance. But big people must not be--and are not--optimists, whatever\
they may pretend. The big man must foresee all the chances against\
success. Then, if his judgment tells him there is still a chance for\
success, his courage of the big man will enable him to go firmly ahead,\
not blunderingly but wisely. The general must be pessimist. The private\
must be optimist; for if he were pessimist, if he saw what the general\
must see, he would be paralyzed with fear and doubt.\
\
\'93You\'92re always grumbling,\'94 said Armitage. \'93Yet you\'92re the luckiest man\
I know.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps that\'92s why,\'94 replied I.\
\
He understood, nodded. \'93Doubtless,\'94 said he.\
\
\'93What\'92s luck? Nothing but shrewd calculation. The fellow who can\'92t\
calculate soon loses any windfalls that may happen to blunder his way.\
But what\'92s the grouch now?\'94\
\
I was so helplessly befogged that I resolved to tell him.\
\
\'93My late wife is threatening not to release me,\'94 said I.\
\
He smiled curiously. \'93But she hasn\'92t done it yet?\'94\
\
\'93Not yet,\'94 replied I. \'93At least not up to eleven o\'92clock this morning,\
New York time.\'94\
\
\'93I don\'92t think she will,\'94 said he.\
\
\'93Why?\'94 demanded I.\
\
\'93You won\'92t let her, for one reason,\'94 replied he.\
\
\'93You\'92re as fond of your freedom as I am. And nothing on earth\
could induce me to marry again. When women--English women--look\
at me I see them fairly twitching to get me where they can make\
free use of me. Yes--marriage has gone the way of everything else.\
Business--finance--politics--religion--they\'92ve all degenerated into so\
many means of graft. And art\'92s going the same way. And marriage--it\'92s\
the woman\'92s great and only graft. Our women look at marriage in two\
ways--how much can be got out of it, living with the man; how much will\
it net as alimony.\'94\
\
\'93You seemed rather positive that my late wife would not hold on to me?\'94\
persisted I.\
\
He eyed me sharply. \'93You really wish to be free?\'94\
\
\'93I am determined to be free.\'94\
\
\'93She\'92s a charming--a lovely woman,\'94 said he.\
\
There was doubt of my candor in his eyes. It is all but impossible for\
a man rightly to judge any woman except her he has tired of or for\
some other reason does not want and cannot imagine himself wanting.\
The unpossessed woman has but the one value; the possessed woman must\
have other values--or she has none. Armitage could judge Edna only as\
female, unpossessed female. Said he:\
\
\'93She\'92s a charming--a lovely woman.\'94\
\
\'93Like the former Mrs. Armitage,\'94 I reminded him.\
\
\'93So--so,\'94 conceded he. \'93But I\'92ve always believed you were a fond\
husband at bottom.\'94\
\
\'93Dismiss it from your mind,\'94 said I. \'93You are hesitating about telling\
me something. Say it!\'94\
\
With a certain nervousness he yielded to his love of gossip. \'93Prince\
Frascatoni--you know him?\'94\
\
I beamed in a reassuring smile. \'93My late wife\'92s chief admirer,\'94 said I.\
\'93A fine fellow. I like him.\'94\
\
\'93He\'92s visiting down at--what\'92s the name of the place your son-in-law\
has taken?\'94\
\
\'93He is?\'94 exclaimed I jubilantly. \'93When did he go?\'94\
\
\'93About a week, I hear.\'94\
\
\'93That looks encouraging, doesn\'92t it?\'94 cried I.\
\
\'93It certainly does,\'94 said he. \'93They say he was charging round town like\
a lunatic up to a few weeks ago----\'94\
\
\'93Two weeks ago,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But now he has calmed again--looks serene. I had a note from him this\
morning. I\'92m positive he\'92s content with the way the cards are falling.\'94\
\
The change in me was so radical that Armitage must have been\
convinced--for the moment. \'93If I only knew!\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I can find out for you,\'94 suggested he. \'93Your daughter has asked me\
down for the week end. I\'92ll sacrifice myself, if you wish.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll take your going as a special favor,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Besides,\'94 he went on, \'93these Anglo-American menages interest me.\
American women are so brash with the men of their own country. I like\
to see them playing the part of meek upper servants. The only kind of\
wife to have is a grateful one. To get a grateful wife an American has\
to marry some poor creature, homely, neglected by everyone till he\
came along. Even then the odds are two to one she\'92ll go crazy about\
herself and despise him--because he stooped to her, if she can\'92t find\
any other excuse. But a titled foreigner-- An American girl is on her\
knees at once and stays there. He can abuse her--step on her--kill her\
almost--neglect her--waste her money. She is still humbly grateful.\'94\
\
\'93The worms have been known to turn,\'94 protested I. For, while I could\
not deny the general truth of Armitage\'92s attack I felt he was whipped\
too far by bitterness that he, for lack of a title, could not command\
what these inferior men with titles had offered to them without the\
bother of asking.\
\
\'93Not a worm,\'94 declared he. \'93No American woman ever divorced a title\
unless she was either in terror of her life or in terror of being\
robbed to the last penny and kicked out.\'94\
\
\'93Thank God all our women aren\'92t title crazy,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93How do you know they aren\'92t?\'94 retorted he. \'93Do you know one who has\
been tempted and has resisted?\'94\
\
I had to confess I did not.\
\
\'93Then you thanked God too soon. The truth is our women are brought up\
to be snobs, spenders--useless, vain parasites. Their systems are all\
ready to be infected with the title mania.\'94\
\
Armitage, on his favorite subject, talked and talked. I did not listen\
attentively--not so much because I did not like what he was saying or\
because I thought him prejudiced as because I knew him to be a secret\
snob of the thoroughgoing variety. I suspected that if things were\
reversed, if he could get a title by marriage and a position that would\
enable him to swagger and would make everyone bow and scrape, he would\
put the eagerest of the female title-hunters to the blush. It may be\
just and proper to criticise women for being what they are. But let us\
also hear in mind that it is not their fault but the fault of their\
training; also that the men do no better when they have the chance to\
live in idle vanity upon the labors of some one else.\
\
On the following Monday my emissary returned from Garton Hall full to\
the brim with news.\
\
But first he had again to assure himself that there was no pretense in\
my seeming anxiety to be free. I saw doubt of me in his eyes before he\
began his adroit cross-examination. I gave no sign that I knew what\
he was about; for in those cases the one chance of convincing is to\
submit to whatever tests may be applied. It was not unnatural that he\
should doubt, coming as he did direct from seeing and talking with the\
charming Edna. Men are habitually fools about women--not because women\
make fools of them but because they enjoy the sensation of making fools\
of themselves. That is a sensation much praised by poets, romancers,\
sentimentalists of all kinds; and because of this praise it has come\
to have a certain fictitious value, has come to be a cheap way for\
a man to imagine himself a devil of a fellow, a figure of romantic\
recklessness. There is no limit to which the passion for living up to\
a pose will not carry a man. Men have flung away their fortunes, their\
lives, for the sake of a pose; martyrs have burned at the stake for\
pose. So a man of experience even more than your ordinary brick-brained\
citizen is distrustful of his fellow men where women are concerned.\
And it is nothing against Armitage\'92s intelligence, nor any sign of his\
having a low estimate of my strength of mind, that he tried to make\
absolutely sure of me before proceeding.\
\
Then, too, there was Edna\'92s charm. Women--I mean, our fashionable and\
would-be fashionable American women of all classes, from Fifth Avenue\
to the Bowery, from Maine to the Pacific--women are parlor-bred--are\
bred to make an imposing surface impression. The best of them fool\
the most expert man, as Edna had been fooling Armitage during those\
two days down in the country. A man has to live with them to find\
them out. And often, our men, being extremely busy and kindly disposed\
toward their women and unobservant of them and uncritical of them, do\
not find them out for many years. The house is run badly, the money\
is wasted, the children are not brought up right. But the man lets it\
pass as \'93part of the game.\'94 He tells himself that not much but good\
looks is to be expected of a woman; he buries himself still deeper in\
his business. Then-- If he is a successful man, along about forty when\
he has got up high enough to be able to relax from the labor of his\
career and thinks of enjoying himself, he tries to form an alliance\
for pleasure with his wife. And lo and behold, he discovers that he is\
married to a vain, superficial fool.\
\
There could have been no more delightful experience than passing a\
few days in the society of Edna. She had educated herself, admirably,\
thoroughly, for show. She could have fooled the fashionable man his\
whole life through, for one cannot see beyond the range of his own\
vision. She might have fooled many a serious man of the narrow type;\
an excellent shoemaker might easily be misled by a clever showy jack\
of all trades into thinking him a master of all trades so long as he\
avoided betraying his ignorance of shoemaking. But your successful\
American man of the highest type, having a broad range of practical\
interests, becomes a shrewd judge of human values. Thus, the American\
woman who can pass for brilliant in fashionable society at home\
or abroad cannot deceive the American man--for long. Not when he\
lives with her. No wonder she finds him coarse; who does not wince\
when vanity is stepped on or ignored? No wonder she thinks him\
uninteresting. A child would have an equally poor opinion of any person\
inexpert at catcher, marbles, and mud pies.\
\
Armitage, in a company of titled people, his nostrils full of his\
beloved, stealthily enjoyed perfumes of wealth and rank, was captivated\
by Edna. If he had stopped a week or so, his American shrewdness might\
have found her out, might have seen why I could view with unruffled\
sleeves, as the Chinese say, the loss of so lovely and lively a\
companion. But, stopping only for the week end, he became doubtful\
of my sincerity. I measured how deeply he had been deluded when he\
spoke of her keen sense of humor. Woman nature is too practical, too\
matter of fact for even the cleverest of them to have a real sense\
of humor--with now and then an exception, of course. Edna had not a\
glimmer of appreciation of either wit or humor. But only I, before\
whom she dropped all pretenses except those that were essential to her\
pose--only I knew this. Before the rest of the world, with the aid of\
her vivacity!--What an aid to women is vivacity!--how many of them it\
marries well!--With the aid of her vivacity she made a convincing show\
not only of appreciating humor and wit but also of having much of both.\
At precisely the right place she gave the proper, convincing, charming\
exhibition of dancing eyes and pearl-white teeth. And occasionally\
with a pretty liveliness she repeated as her own some witticism she\
had heard much applauded in another and remote company. But I do not\
blame you, ladies, for your inveterate and incessant posing. We men\
are determined to idealize and to be gulled, and you need us to pay for\
your luxury and your finery.\
\
I let Armitage probe on and on until my impatience for his news would\
suffer no further delay. I said:\
\
\'93I see you refuse to be convinced. So let it go at that, and tell me\
what you found out. Is she to marry Frascatoni?\'94\
\
\'93As I\'92ve been telling you, I believe she is in love with you, Loring.\'94\
\
\'93But is she going to free me?\'94\
\
\'93Unless you do something pretty soon, I\'92m afraid you\'92ll lose her.\'94\
\
It was too absurd that he, who had lived with one of these showy\
vivacious women, had found her out and had rid himself of her should be\
thus taken in by another of precisely the same kind. But that\'92s the way\
it is with men. They understand why they yawn at their own show piece;\
but they can\'92t appreciate that all show pieces in time produce the same\
effect.\
\
\'93There still remain three weeks before the day on which her lawyers\
must ask the judge to confirm the decree,\'94 said I. \'93Do you think she\
will have them do it or not?\'94\
\
\'93Unless you get busy, old man----\'94\
\
\'93But I shall not get busy. I shall do everything I can to encourage her\
to stay free.\'94\
\
\'93Then you\'92ll lose her,\'94 said he. \'93Frascatoni is mad about her, and he\
knows how to make an impression on a woman. It irritated me to see a\
damned dago carrying off such a prize--and you know I\'92m not prejudiced\
in favor of American women.\'94\
\
\'93I want to see her happy,\'94 said I. \'93She will be happy with him--so, I\
hope he gets her.\'94 I laughed mockingly. \'93She wouldn\'92t be happy with an\
American, Bob--not even with you.\'94\
\
He colored guiltily. \'93That idea never entered my head,\'94 protested he.\
\
But I laughed the more. \'93And she wouldn\'92t have you, Bob,\'94 I went on.\
\'93So, don\'92t put yourself in the way of being made uncomfortable.\'94\
\
He had enjoyed himself hugely. Not only was my former wife most\
entertaining, but also Margot. She had, beyond question, been\
beautifully educated for the part she was to take in life. Her\
manner--so Armitage assured me--was the perfection of gracious\
simplicity--the most exquisite exhibition of the perfect lady--\'93note\
how ladylike I am, yet how I treat you as if you were my equal.\'94\
Gracious--there\'92s the word that expresses the whole thing. And she\
had a quantity of bright parlor tricks--French recitation, a little\
ladylike singing in a pleasant plaintive soprano that gave people an\
excuse for saying: \'93She could have been a grand-opera star if she had\
cared to go in seriously for that sort of thing.\'94 Also, a graceful\
skirt dance and a killing cake walk. She had an effective line of\
fashionable conversation, too--about books and pictures, analysis\
of soul states, mystic love theories--all the paraphernalia of a\
first-class heroine of a first-class society novel. And you, gentle\
reader, who know nothing, would never have dreamed that she knew\
nothing. You who are futile would not have seen how worthless she\
was--except to do skirt dances well enough for a drawing-room or to\
talk soul states well enough for a society novel.\
\
The more Armitage discoursed of the delights of his little visit the\
more nervous I became lest Edna should again change her mind and\
inflict me further. What he had said brought back my life with her in\
stinging vividness. I lived again the days of my self-deception, the\
darker days of my slow awakening, the black days of my full realization\
of the mess my life was, and of my feeling that there was no escape for\
me.\
\
\'93I will admit, Loring,\'94 said Armitage, \'93that as women go our women are\
the best of all.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 I assented, sincerely. \'93And they ought to be. America is the\
best place to grow men. Why shouldn\'92t it be the best place to grow\
women?\'94\
\
He did not pursue the subject. In his heart he disagreed with me, for\
he was wholly out of conceit with everything American. His pose had\
been the other way, and he shrank from uncovering himself.\
\
A day or so later I was crossing Green Park when I ran straight into\
Hartley Beechman. I smiled pleasantly, though not too cordially. He\
planted himself in front of me and stared with a tragic frown. I then\
noted that he verged on the unkempt, that he had skipped his morning\
shave and perhaps his bath. His stare was unmistakably offensive--the\
look of a man who is seeking a quarrel.\
\
\'93How\'92re you, Beechman?\'94 said I, ignoring the signs of foul weather.\
\'93Armitage told me you were in town, but didn\'92t know your address.\
Stopping long?\'94\
\
\'93You are a scoundrel,\'94 said he.\
\
I shrugged my shoulders. As I was much the larger and stronger man I\
could afford to do it. \'93So I\'92ve often heard,\'94 said I. \'93Perhaps it\'92s\
true. What of it? Why should you think I cared to know your opinion of\
me?\'94\
\
\'93If I send you a challenge will you accept it?\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93No, I never pay the slightest attention to crank letters.\'94\
\
\'93You are a coward. You will not give me a chance to meet you on equal\
terms.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll take you over my knee and give you a spanking if you don\'92t behave\
yourself,\'94 said I, and I pushed him out of my path and was passing on.\
\
\'93You took her away from me,\'94 he jeered. \'93But it will do you no good.\
She is laughing at us both.\'94\
\
I strode away. I had heard enough to put me in high good humor.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
As the end of my wait upon the anxious seat drew into its last week, I\
fell into a state of deep depression. Too much eating and drinking was,\
of course, the cause. But I had to pass the time somehow; and what is\
there to do in London but eat and drink?\
\
Four days before the last, Rossiter came into my sitting room with\
the news that Edna was calling. There arose a nice question: Would I\
better send word I was out or see her? Because of my knowledge of her\
persistence where her interest was really engaged, I decided to see her\
and have done with. So in she came, vivacious, radiant--dressed for a\
scene in which she was to be heroine, as I saw at a glance.\
\
\'93Pray don\'92t think I\'92m going to repeat what I did the other day,\'94 cried\
she by way of beginning. \'93I\'92m in quite another mood.\'94\
\
\'93So I see,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I was horribly ashamed and disgusted with myself afterwards,\'94 she went\
on. \'93You must have thought me crazy. In fact, you did. You treated me\
as if I were.\'94\
\
\'93Won\'92t you sit?\'94 said I, arranging a chair for her.\
\
She smiled mischievously at me as she seated herself. \'93You do know\
something about women,\'94 said she. \'93You put this chair so that my face\
would be spared the strong light.\'94 As she said this, she turned into\
the full strength of the light a face as free as a girl\'92s from wrinkles\
or any other sign of years. \'93You certainly do know something about\
women.\'94\
\
\'93Very little,\'94 said I, for it was not a time to pause and poke a\
finger into the swelling bubble of woman\'92s baffling complexity and\
unfathomable mystery. \'93You\'92ve come to tell me what it was you wanted\
the other day?\'94\
\
She shook her head. She was wearing a charming hat--but her costumes\
were never indifferent and nearly always charming--a feat the more\
remarkable because she, being a timidly conventional woman, followed\
the fashions and ventured cautiously and never far in individual style.\
\'93You\'92re usually right, my dear,\'94 said she, \'93in your guesses at people\'92s\
underlying motives. But you were mistaken that time. I wanted exactly\
what I said. I wanted _you_.\'94\
\
\'93Incredible,\'94 laughed I.\
\
\'93Yes--it does sound so,\'94 conceded she. \'93But it\'92s the truth. I had a\
queer attack--an attack of jealousy. I\'92d often heard of that sort of\
thing. I fancied myself above it. Perhaps that was why I fell such\
a foolish victim. But I\'92ve recovered completely.\'94 And her eyes were\
mocking me as if she had a secret joke on me.\
\
\'93It couldn\'92t last long,\'94 said I, to be saying something.\
\
\'93No, perhaps not,\'94 replied she. \'93At any rate, as soon as I heard of\
Mary Kirkwood\'92s engagement I was cured--instantly cured.\'94\
\
\'93I told you she was engaged,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Oh, I don\'92t mean that Beechman person,\'94 scoffed Edna. \'93She was simply\
amusing herself with him. A woman--a woman of our world--might have\
an affair with a man of that sort--as you men sometimes do with queer\
women. But she wouldn\'92t think of _marrying_ him. Marriage is a serious\
matter.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s a woman\'92s whole career,\'94 pursued she. \'93It means not only her\
position, but the position of her children, too.\'94\
\
\'93Very serious,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93No--I mean Mary\'92s engagement to Count von Tilzer-Borgfeldt.\'94\
\
\'93I hadn\'92t heard of it,\'94 said I indifferently. There could be nothing in\
such a silly story.\
\
\'93Didn\'92t Bob Armitage tell you?\'94\
\
\'93Not yet,\'94 said I. \'93But why should he?\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s queer,\'94 mused she. \'93Perhaps he thought there might be a little\
something in the talk about you and Mary, and that it would be well not\
to stir things up.\'94\
\
\'93That might account for it,\'94 I agreed.\
\
She was studying me closely. \'93I believe you really didn\'92t care about\
Mary,\'94 continued she. \'93I confess I was astonished when I first heard\
that you did. She\'92s--\'94 Edna laughed--\'93hardly up to _me_.\'94\
\
\'93Hardly,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But let\'92s not talk of her. I\'92ve forgotten all that. I\'92ve come to make\
a last proposal to you.\'94\
\
She was smiling, but I detected seriousness in her eyes, in her\
unsteady upper lip, in her hands trying not to move restlessly.\
\
\'93You don\'92t realize what a strong hold you have on me, Godfrey. Is it\
love? Is it habit? I don\'92t know. But I can\'92t shake it off. Don\'92t you\
think me strange, talking to you in this way?\'94\
\
\'93Why shouldn\'92t you?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s more like a woman who isn\'92t attractive to men.\'94\
\
\'93On the contrary,\'94 said I. \'93You speak like a woman accustomed to deal\
with men according to her own good pleasure.\'94\
\
\'93How shrewd that is!\'94 said she, with an admiring glance. \'93How shrewd\
you are! That\'92s what I miss in other men--in these men over here who\
have so much that I admire. But they--well, they give me the feeling\
that they are superficial. Do you think _I_ am superficial?\'94\
\
\'93How could I?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93That\'92s an evasion,\'94 laughed she. \'93You _do_ think so. And perhaps I am.\
A woman ought to be. A man looks after the serious side of life. The\
woman\'92s side is the lighter and graceful side--don\'92t you think so?\'94\
\
\'93That sounds plausible,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But I grow tired of superficial men. They give me the feeling\
that--well, that they couldn\'92t be relied on. And you are reliable,\
Godfrey. I feel about you that no matter what happened you\'92d be equal\
to it. And that\'92s why I don\'92t want to give you up.\'94\
\
I sat with my eyes down, as if I were listening and reflecting.\
\
\'93Since you\'92ve been over here long enough to--to broaden a little-- You\
don\'92t mind my saying you\'92ve broadened?\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s true,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92ve fancied perhaps you might be seeing that I wasn\'92t altogether\
wrong in my ideas?\'94\
\
\'93Yes?\'94 said I, as she hesitated.\
\
\'93Margot was telling me about some plans you had--for living on the\
other side. You weren\'92t in earnest?\'94\
\
I looked at her gravely. \'93Very much in earnest,\'94 said I. \'93I shall never\
again, in any circumstances, live as we used to live.\'94\
\
She sank back in her chair, slowly turned her parasol round and round.\
\'93Then--it\'92s hopeless,\'94 said she, with a sigh that was a sob also. And\
the look in the eyes she lifted to mine went straight to my heart. \'93I\
simply can\'92t stand America,\'94 said she. \'93It reminds me of--\'94 She rose\
impatiently. \'93If you only knew, Godfrey, how I _loathe_ my origin--the\
dreadful depth we came from--the commonness of it.\'94 She shuddered.\
\
\'93Europe is the place for you,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Yes, it is,\'94 cried she. \'93And we could be happy over here--if you\'92d\
only see it in the right light. Godfrey, I don\'92t want to--to change.\
Won\'92t you compromise?\'94\
\
\'93By conceding everything?\'94 said I good-humoredly. \'93By becoming the\
bedraggled tail to your gay and giddy kite?\'94\
\
\'93You simply won\'92t reason about these things!\'94 exclaimed she. \'93Yet they\
say men are reasonable!\'94\
\
\'93My dear Edna, I don\'92t ask you to make yourself wretched for _my_ sake.\
And I don\'92t purpose to be wretched for _your_ sake.\'94\
\
She sat down again. The brightness had faded from her. She looked older\
than I\'92d have believed she could. \'93Well--I see it\'92s useless,\'94 she said\
finally. \'93And as I\'92ve got to stay over here, I simply must marry again.\
You understand that?\'94\
\
\'93Perfectly,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Don\'92t you care the least bit?\'94 said she wistfully.\
\
\'93You wish me to be unhappy about it,\'94 laughed I, \'93to gratify your\
vanity.\'94\
\
She sighed again.\
\
\'93You are content with the settlements?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes,\'94 said she wearily.\
\
No doubt you, gentle reader, are now completely won over to her and\
think that the least I could in decency have done would have been\
to insist on her accepting half my fortune. I had no impulse toward\
that folly. There is a kind of wife who can justly claim that she is\
the equal partner in her husband\'92s wealth. But not the Edna kind. I\
had made my fortune in spite of her. Nor was I keen to give her any\
more money than I should be compelled; why turn over wealth to her to\
fritter away and to bolster the pretensions of a family of worthless\
Italian aristocrats?\
\
With a sudden darting look at me, she said: \'93You know Frascatoni. What\
do you think of him?\'94\
\
\'93A fine specimen,\'94 said I. \'93A fascinating man.\'94\
\
She shrugged her shoulders. \'93Fascinating enough, I suppose. But--would\
you _trust_ him?\'94\
\
\'93I would not,\'94 replied I. \'93Nor any other man. I have long since learned\
not to trust even myself. But I\'92d trust him as far as the next man--as\
far as it\'92s necessary to trust anyone.\'94\
\
She nodded in appreciation and agreement. \'93I believe he genuinely cares\
for me,\'94 she said, adding with a melancholy look at me, \'93And it\'92s\
pleasant to be cared about.\'94\
\
\'93So I have heard,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You never wanted anyone to care about you,\'94 said she. \'93You are\
independent of everything and everybody.\'94\
\
\'93That\'92s safest,\'94 said I.\
\
She did not reply. After reflecting she burst out with, \'93You ought to\
have _made_ me, Godfrey--ought to have trained me to your taste. Women\
have to be _made_.\'94\
\
\'93Even if that had been possible in this case,\'94 I observed, \'93I didn\'92t\
know enough.\'94\
\
Again she thought a long time; then with a sigh she said: \'93But it\'92s too\
late now. You\'92re right. It\'92s too late.\'94\
\
It puzzled me to note how much the world had taught her in some\
ways, and how little in others. But that is a familiar puzzle--the\
unexpected, startling ways in which knowledge juts out into ignorance\
and ignorance closes in upon knowledge, forming a coast line between\
the land of knowledge and the sea of ignorance more jagged than that\
of Alaska or Norway. The result is that each of us is a confused\
contention of wisdom and folly in which the imperious instincts of\
elemental passions and appetites, by their steady persistence, easily\
get their way.\
\
\'93Since I\'92ve begun to look at these foreign men seriously,\'94 she went on,\
\'93to study them-- It\'92s one thing to size them up, as you say in America,\
with the idea that they\'92re mere outsiders--acquaintances--social\
friends. It\'92s very different to measure them with a view to serious\
relations. I\'92m not altogether a fool--even from your standpoint--am I,\
Godfrey?\'94\
\
\'93Distinctly not,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Since I\'92ve been _studying_ these upper-class men over here--I\'92ve\
changed my mind in some respects. I\'92m not a child, you know. I haven\'92t\
done what I\'92ve done without using some judgment of men and women.\'94\
She flooded me with a smile of gratitude. \'93I owe my judgment to you,\
Godfrey. You taught me.\'94\
\
\'93You never agreed with anything I said--when I did occasionally venture\
an opinion.\'94\
\
\'93Because a woman disagrees and scorns--it doesn\'92t follow that she isn\'92t\
convinced.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve changed your mind about these men?\'94 said I, for my curiosity\
was aroused.\
\
\'93I find a lack in them. You\'92re right to a certain extent, Godfrey. They\
_are_ futile--the cleverest of them. Culture gives a great deal, of\
course.\'94\
\
\'93What?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93It\'92s too long and involved to explain. And you don\'92t believe in it.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m willing to,\'94 said I. \'93But first, I\'92d like to know what it is, and\
second, I\'92d like to know what it _does_. I\'92ve never been able to get\
anything but words in answer to either question.\'94\
\
\'93Well, _I_ see that it gives a great deal. But I must admit that it\
takes away something--yes, much--strength from the mind and softness\
from the heart.\'94\
\
I was astonished at this admission from her--at the admission itself,\
at the fresh evidences of what a good natural mind she had. But I\
had no desire to discuss with her. I had long outgrown the folly of\
discussion with futile people. I was tempted to air my own views of\
this so-called culture--how it emasculated where it pretended to\
soften; how it discovered nothing, invented nothing, produced nothing,\
did not feed, or clothe, or shelter, or in any way contribute to the\
sane happiness of a human being; how it unfitted men and women for\
active life, made them pitiful spectators merely, scoffing or smiling\
superciliously at the battle. But I refrained. I knew she believed\
the r\'f4le of spectator the only one worthy a lady or a gentleman--and\
certainly it is the only one either lady or gentleman could take\
without being exposed as ridiculous. I knew that her wise observations\
were clever conversation merely, after the manner of futile\
people--that when the time for action came her snobbishness dominated\
her.\
\
\'93I wish these men were not so--so----\'94\
\
\'93Good-for-nothing?\'94 I suggested.\
\
She accepted the phrase, though she would have preferred one less\
mercilessly truthful.\
\
\'93You can\'92t find everything in one person,\'94 said I.\
\
That kind of tame generality--lack of interest thinly veiled in a\
polite show of interest--kills conversation and sets a tarrying caller\
to moving where dead silence produces a nervous tendency to linger.\
Edna extended her arm, resting her hand upon the crook of her parasol\
in a gesture of approaching departure. Yet she seemed loth to go. She\
rose, but counterbalanced with:\
\
\'93You know, I suppose, that it\'92s likely to be Frascatoni?\'94\
\
I rose, replied indifferently, \'93So I hear.\'94\
\
She stood, smiling vaguely down at the gloved hand on the crook of the\
parasol. \'93If I were only younger--or more credulous,\'94 said she. And I\
knew that there was a thin, sour after-taste to the sparkling wine of\
the prince\'92s love-making. I smiled--pleasant, noncommittal.\
\
\'93I ask too much of life,\'94 said she impatiently. \'93Isn\'92t it irritating\
that I should become critical just as I am in a position to get\
everything I\'92ve longed for and worked for?\'94\
\
\'93Those moods pass,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93No doubt,\'94 said she. \'93Well--good-by.\'94 She put out her hand with a\
radiant smile. \'93I\'92ll not annoy you any more.\'94\
\
My answering smile and pressure of the hand were friendly, but\
cautiously so, for I felt I was still on thin ice. I opened the door\
for her. We shook hands again. Our eyes met. I think it must have given\
each of us a shock to see in the other\'92s face the polite, distant look\
of strangers parting. How easy it is for two to become like one--and\
when they are, how impossible it seems that they could ever be aliens.\
How easy it is for two that are as one to become utter strangers; the\
sea is wide, and its currents curve rapidly away from each other.\
\
\'93Rossiter,\'94 said I--he was at work in the anteroom, \'93take Mrs. Loring\
to her carriage, please.\'94\
\
So--she was gone; I was free!\
\
\
\
\
XIII\
\
\
Not a shadow of doubt lingered. She was gone; I was free. Her manner\
had been the manner of finality. Her reluctance and her sadness were\
little more than the convention of mourning which human beings feel\
compelled to display on mortuary occasions of all kinds. Beneath the\
crepe I saw a not discontented resignation, a conviction of the truth\
that life together was impossible for her and me.\
\
My male readers--those who have a thinking apparatus and use it--will\
probably wonder, as I did then, that she had overlooked certain obvious\
advantages to be gained through refusing to divorce me. She knew me\
well enough to be certain I would not compel her to go to America and\
live with me, but if she insisted would let her stay in Europe or\
wander where she pleased. This would have given her all the advantages\
of widowhood. Free, with plenty of money, she could have led her own\
life, without ever having to consult the conveniences and caprices of\
a husband. It seemed to me singularly stupid of her to resign this\
signal advantage, to tie herself to a husband she could not ignore, a\
husband she already saw would bore her, as poseurs invariably bore each\
other--to tie herself to such a man with no compensating advantage but\
a title. Indeed, so stupid did it seem that from the moment she began\
to waver about confirming the divorce I all but lost hope of freedom.\
\
My women readers will understand her. A man cannot appreciate how\
hampered a woman of the lady class is without a legitimate male\
attachment of some kind--a husband, a brother, or a father in constant\
attendance, ready for use the instant the need arises. Our whole\
society is built upon the theory that woman is the dependent, the\
appendage of man. Freedom is impossible for a woman, except at a price\
almost no woman voluntarily pays. To have any measure of freedom a\
woman must bind herself to some man, and the bondage has to be cruel\
indeed not to be preferable to the so-called freedom of the unattached\
female. Thus it was not altogether snobbishness, it may not have been\
chiefly snobbishness, that moved Edna to transfer herself to a husband\
who would be a more or less unpleasant actuality. She had to have a\
man. She wished to live abroad and to be in fashionable society. She\
chose shrewdly. I imagine, from several things she said, that she had\
measured Frascatoni with calm impartiality, had discovered many serious\
disadvantages in him as husband to a woman of her fondness for her own\
way. But estimating the disadvantages at their worst, the balance still\
tipped heavily toward him.\
\
I am glad I was not born a woman. I pity the women of our day, bred\
and educated in the tastes of men, yet compelled to be dependents, and\
certain of defeat in a finish contest with man.\
\
Though there was now no reasonable doubt of Edna\'92s having the decree of\
divorce made final, I, through overcaution or oversensitiveness as to\
Mary Kirkwood\'92s rights, or what motive you please, would not let myself\
leave London until a cable from my lawyers in New York informed me that\
the decree had been entered and that I was legally free. The newspapers\
had given much space to our affairs. It was assumed that I had come\
abroad \'93to make last desperate efforts to win back the beautiful and\
charming wife, the favorite of fashionable European society.\'94 Stories\
had been published, giving in minute detail accounts of the bribes I\
had offered. And when the final decree was entered, my chagrin and fury\
were pictured vividly.\
\
I did nothing to discredit this, but, on the contrary, helped along the\
campaign for the preservation of the literary and journalistic fiction\
that the American woman is a kind of divine autocrat over mankind. If\
I had been so vain and so ungallant as to try to make the public see\
the truth I should have failed. You can discredit the truth to the\
foolish race of men; but you cannot discredit, nor even cast a shade\
of doubt upon, a generally accepted fiction of sentimentality. And of\
all the sentimental fictions that everyone slobbers over, but no one\
in his heart believes with the living and only valid faith of works,\
the fictions about woman are the most sacred. Further, how many men are\
there who believe that a man could get enough of a physically lovely\
woman, however trying she might be? Once in a while in a novel--not\
often, but once in a while--there are scenes portraying with some\
approach to fidelity what happens between a woman and a man who is\
of the sort that is attractive to women. Invariably such scenes are\
derided or denounced by the critics. Why? For an obvious reason. A\
critic is, to put it charitably, an average man. He has no insight; he\
must rely for his knowledge of life solely upon experience. Now what\
is the average man\'92s experience of women? He treats them in a certain\
dull, conventional way, and they treat him--as he invites and compels.\
So when he reads how women act toward a man who does not leave them\
cold or indifferent, who rouses in them some sensation other than\
wonder whether they would be able to stomach him as a husband, the\
critic scoffs and waxes wroth. The very idea that women might be less\
reserved, less queenly, less grudgingly gracious than woman has ever\
been to him sends shooting pains through his vanity--and toothache and\
sciatica are mild compared with the torturings of a pain-shotten vanity.\
\
Edna scored heavily in the newspapers. You would never have suspected\
it was her late husband\'92s money that had given her everything, that\
had made her throughout; for, what had she, and what was she, except\
a product of lavishly squandered money? Think about that carefully,\
gentle reader, before you damn me and commiserate her as in these pages\
a victim of my venomous malice.... She was the newspaper heroine of the\
hour. If she had been content with this-- But I shall not anticipate.\
\
My cable message from New York came at five o\'92clock. At half-past six,\
accompanied only by my valet, I was journeying toward Switzerland.\
\
Mrs. Kirkwood, I had learned from her brother, was at Territet, at the\
Hotel Excelsior, with the Horace Armstrongs. At four the following\
afternoon I descended at Montreux from the Milan express; at five, with\
travel stains removed, I was in the garden of the Excelsior having\
tea with Mrs. Armstrong and listening to her raptures over the Savoy\
Alps. Doubtless you know Mrs. Armstrong\'92s (Neva Carlin\'92s) work. Her\
portrait of Edna is famous, is one of the best examples I know of\
inside-outness. Edna does not like it, perhaps for that reason.\
\
Mary and Horace Armstrong had gone up to Caux. \'93But,\'94 said Neva,\
\'93they\'92ll surely be back in a few minutes. Count von Tilzer-Borgfeldt is\
coming at half-past five.\'94\
\
I instantly recognized that name as the one Edna gave in telling me\
that Mary had gone shopping for a title and had invested. I had thought\
Edna\'92s jeer produced no effect upon me. I might have known better. My\
nature has, inevitably, been made morbidly suspicious by my business\
career. Also, I had found out Robert Armitage as a well-veneered snob,\
and this could not but have put me in an attitude of watchfulness\
toward his sister, so like him mentally. Also my investigations of\
that most important phenomenon of American life, the American woman,\
had compelled me to the conclusion that the disease of snobbishness\
had infected them all, with a few doubtful exceptions. So, without my\
realizing it, my mind was prepared to believe that Mary Kirkwood was\
like the rest. When Neva Armstrong pronounced the name Edna had given,\
there shot through me that horrible feeling of insufferable heat and\
insufferable cold which it would be useless to attempt to describe; for\
those who have felt it will understand at once, and those who have not\
could not be made to understand. And then I recalled Hartley Beechman\'92s\
jeer, \'93She\'92s laughing at us both.\'94 But my voice was natural as I said:\
\
\'93Tilzer-Borgfeldt. That\'92s the chap she\'92s engaged to just now, isn\'92t it?\'94\
\
Mrs. Armstrong, who is a loyal friend, flushed angrily. \'93Mary isn\'92t\
that sort, and you know it, for you\'92ve known her a long time.\'94\
\
\'93Then she\'92s not engaged to him?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Yes, she is,\'94 replied Neva. \'93And if you knew him, you\'92d not wonder at\
it. I don\'92t like foreigners, but if I weren\'92t bespoke I think I\'92d have\
to take Tilzer-Borgfeldt if he asked me.\'94\
\
\'93No doubt it\'92s a first-class title,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93You know perfectly well, Godfrey Loring, that I don\'92t mean the title.\'94\
She happened to glance toward the entrance to the garden. \'93Here he\
comes now. You\'92ll judge for yourself.\'94\
\
Advancing toward us was a big, happy blond man of the pattern from\
which nine out of ten German upper-class men are cut. He had the\
expression of simple, unaffected joy natural to a big, healthy, happy\
blond youth looking forward to seeing his best girl. He had youth, good\
looks, unusual personal magnetism--and you will imagine what effect\
this produced upon my mood. I could not deny that Neva was right.\
Without a title this man would have all the chances in his favor when\
he went courting. He had not a trace of aristocratic futility.\
\
You would have admired the frank cordiality of my greeting. Instead of\
sitting down again I glanced at my watch and said:\
\
\'93Well, my time\'92s up. I shall have to go without seeing Horace and Mary.\'94\
\
\'93But you\'92ll come to dinner?\'94 said Mrs. Armstrong.\
\
\'93I\'92m taking the first express back to Paris,\'94 said I. \'93I found a\
telegram waiting for me at my hotel.\'94\
\
\'93Mary will be disappointed,\'94 said Neva. \'93You\'92ll give Mrs. Loring my\
best?\'94\
\
I remembered that the English papers, with the news doubtless in it,\
would not reach Territet until late that evening or the following\
morning. But I could not well tell her what had occurred. \'93Good-by,\'94\
said I, shaking hands. \'93Tell them how sorry I was. I may see you all in\
Paris.\'94\
\
And away I went, with not an outward sign of my internal state. In less\
than half an hour I was in the Paris express.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
I stopped at Paris a month. A letter came from her--a bulky letter. I\
tossed it unopened into the fire. A week, and a second letter came. It\
was not so bulky. I flung it unopened into the fire. About two weeks,\
and a third letter came. I got Rossiter to address an envelope to her.\
I inclosed her unopened letter in the envelope and mailed it. I was\
giving myself an exquisite pleasure, the keener because it was seasoned\
with exquisite pain.\
\
All this time I had been amusing my idle days in the usual fashion.\
My readers who lead quiet lives--the women who sit thinking what they\
would do if only they were men--the men who slip away occasionally\
for a scampish holiday, and return to their sober routine with the\
cheering impression that they have been most fearfully and wonderfully\
devilish--those women and those men will regret that I refrain from\
details of how I amused myself. But to my notion I have said enough\
when I have said \'93in the usual fashion.\'94 It passed the time as probably\
nothing else in the circumstances would have passed such tenacious\
hours, every one lingering to be counted. But I confess I have never\
been virtuous enough to be especially raptured by so-called vice. No\
doubt those who divide actions into good and bad, using the good for\
steady diet and the bad for dessert, have advantages in enjoyment over\
those who simply regard things as interesting and uninteresting. For,\
curiously enough, on that latter basis of division practically all the\
things esteemed by most human beings as the delightful but devilish\
dessert of life fall into the class of more or less uninteresting. But\
for the stimulus of the notion that he is doing something courageously,\
daringly wicked, I doubt if any but a dull fellow would perpetrate\
vice enough to lift the most easily scandalized hands in the world.\
The trouble with vice is that it is so tiresome--and so bad for the\
health. And most of it is so vulgar. Drinking to excess and gambling,\
for instance. I have indulged in both at times, when hard pressed\
for ways to pass the time or when in those stupid moods of obstinate\
unreasonableness in which a man takes a savage pleasure in disgusting\
himself with himself. Drinking has a certain coarse appeal to the\
imagination--coarse and slight but definite. But gambling is sheer\
vulgarity. I have been called money-mad, because I have made money,\
finding it easy and occupying to attend to business. Yet never have I\
cared about money sufficiently to take the faintest interest in the\
gaming table. Gambling--all forms of it--is for those sordid creatures\
who love money, and who have no intelligent appreciation of its value.\
Gambling--all the vices, for that matter--is essentially aristocratic;\
for, as I believe I have explained, aristocracy analyzes into the\
quintessence of vulgarity. The two incompetent classes--the topmost\
and the bottommost--are steeped in vice, for the same reason of their\
incompetence to think or to act.\
\
A fourth letter, the bulkiest of all, came from Mary Kirkwood. A few\
hours before it was delivered a telegram came from her:\
\
  \'93A letter is on the way. Godfrey, I beg you to read it. I love you.\'94\
\
I tore up the telegram, sent back the letter without opening it. You\
are denouncing me as inhuman, gentle reader. Perhaps you are right.\
But permit me to point out to you that, if I had not in my composition\
a vein of iron, I should never have risen from the mosquito-haunted\
flats of the Passaic. Also, gentle reader, if I had been a man of the\
ordinary sort would Mary Kirkwood have been sufficiently interested in\
me to send those letters and that telegram?\
\
A day or so after the return of her last letter I was seized--I can\'92t\
say why--with a longing to see my father and mother and sister, on that\
lonely farm out in New Jersey. I had never felt that desire since I\
first left home, but had made my few and brief visits out of a sense\
of duty--no, of shame. The thought of them gave me no sensation of\
horror, as it gave Edna and her daughter. When I remembered them it\
was simply as one remembers any random fact. They did not understand\
me; and in them there was nothing to understand. We had few subjects\
for conversation, and those not wildly interesting and soon exhausted.\
You will smile when I say I loved them. Yet it is the truth. We do not\
always love those we like to be with; we do not always like to be with\
those we love.\
\
There was nothing to detain me in Paris. The hours hung like guests\
who do not know how to take leave. So not many days elapsed between\
my seizure and my appearance at the spacious and comfortable stone\
farmhouse where the four old people were awaiting in a semi-comatose or\
dozing state what they firmly believed was a summons to a higher life.\
Their belief in it, like that of most religious people, was not strong\
enough to make them impatient to get it; still they believed, and found\
the belief a satisfactory way of employing such small part of their\
minds as remained awake.\
\
I had not seen them or their place in several years, so I was\
astonished by the changes. My sister Polly--a homely old maid--and\
Edna\'92s father had some glimmerings of enterprise. Polly took in and\
read several magazines, and from them gathered odds and ends of\
up-to-date ideas about dress, about furnishing, about gardens. With\
the valuable assistance of old Weeping Willie she had wrought a most\
creditable transformation. The old people now \'93looked like something,\'94\
as the saying is. And the place had a real smartness--both within and\
without.\
\
Polly--she was about eight years my senior, but looked old enough to be\
my mother--Polly watched me anxiously as I strolled and nosed about. My\
delight filled her with delight.\
\
\'93You\'92re not so ashamed of us, perhaps?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93I never have been,\'94 replied I. Nor did I put an accent on the personal\
pronoun that would have been a hint about somebody else\'92s feelings.\
\
\'93Well--you ought to have been,\'94 said she. \'93We were mighty far behind\
even the tail of the procession.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92ll admit I like this better than the way we used to live in Passaic.\
Polly, you\'92ve got the best there is going. All the rest--all the luxury\
and other nonsense--is nothing but a source of unhappiness.\'94\
\
She did not answer. I noted a touching sadness in her expression.\
\
\'93You don\'92t agree with me?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Yes, I do,\'94 replied she emphatically. \'93I wasn\'92t thinking of that.\'94\
\
\'93What have _you_ got to be unhappy about?\'94\
\
\'93You think I\'92m ungrateful to you,\'94 said she, with quick sensitiveness.\
\'93But I\'92m not, Godfrey--indeed I\'92m not.\'94\
\
\'93Ungrateful?\'94 I laughed. \'93Don\'92t talk nonsense.\'94\
\
\'93You\'92ve done all you could--all anyone could. And in a way I am happy.\
But----\'94\
\
\'93Yes?\'94 I urged, as she hesitated.\
\
\'93Well, I\'92ve found out--looking back over my life--I\'92ve found out that\
I-- It seems to me I\'92ve got all the _tools_ of happiness, but nothing\
to _work on_. I keep thinking, \'91How happy I could be if I only had\
something to work on!\'92\'94\
\
I was silent. A shadow crept out of a black corner of my heart and cast\
a somberness and a chill over me.\
\
\'93You understand?\'94 said she.\
\
I nodded.\
\
\'93I thought you would,\'94 she went on. \'93Godfrey, I\'92ve often felt sorry for\
you--sorrier than I do for myself.\'94 She laid her hand on my arm. \'93But\
you\'92re a man--a handsome, attractive, _young_ man. You\'92ll have only\
yourself to blame if you waste your life as mine\'92s been wasted.\'94\
\
\'93You don\'92t realize how lucky you\'92ve been,\'94 said I, with a bitterness\
that surprised me. \'93You\'92ve at least escaped marriage.\'94\
\
\'93I wish to God I hadn\'92t,\'94 cried she with an energy that startled me.\
There was a fierce look of pain in her eyes. \'93I thought you understood.\
But I see you don\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean, Polly Ann?\'94 said I gently.\
\
\'93The real unhappiness isn\'92t an unhappy marriage,\'94 replied she. \'93It\'92s\
being not married at all--not having any children. You know what I\
am--an old maid. You think that means the same thing as old bachelor.\
Well, it don\'92t.\'94\
\
\'93Why not?\'94\
\
\'93An old bachelor--nine times out of ten that means simply an old,\
selfish, comfortable man. But an old maid-- The nature of woman\'92s\
different from the nature of man. A woman\'92s got to have a home--_her_\
home--her nest, with her children in it. And I\'92m an old maid. If I\'92d\
been a man--\'94 She turned on me. \'93I\'92m ugly, ain\'92t I? You know I am.\
_I_ know it. Dress me up in men\'92s clothes and I\'92d be a good-looking\
person--as a man. But as a woman I\'92m ugly. If I\'92d have been a man I\
could have got a mighty nice, mighty nice-looking wife--one that\'92d have\
been grateful to me for taking her and would have cared for me. But as\
a woman I couldn\'92t get a husband.\'94\
\
\'93You can get a very good one,\'94 said I. \'93Money--what would have bought\
you a wife as a man--what buys most men their wives--will buy you a\
husband. And he\'92ll be grateful and loving, so long as you manage the\
purse strings well--just as most wives are loving and grateful if their\
husbands don\'92t treat them too indulgently.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s different, and you know it is,\'94 retorted she. \'93Custom has made it\
different. And I\'92m ugly--and that\'92s fatal in a woman.\'94\
\
\'93Charm will beat beauty every time,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92ve got no charm--none on the outside. And that\'92s where a woman\'92s\
charm has to be. No, I\'92ve thought out my case. It\'92s hopeless. I\'92m a\
born old maid. No man ever asked me to marry him. No man ever said a\
word of love to me. Do you know what that means, Godfrey?\'94\
\
I was silent. A choke in my throat made speech impossible.\
\
\'93Never a word of love,\'94 she went on monotonously. \'93Yet I don\'92t suppose\
any woman ever wanted to hear it more. And no children. Yet I know\
no woman ever wanted them more. No, not adopted children--but my own\
flesh and blood. I\'92ve heard women complain of the burden of bearing a\
child. It made me wild to listen to them--the fools--the selfish fools!\
What wouldn\'92t I have given to have felt a child within me. Does it\
scandalize you to hear me talk like this?\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said I. \'93No.\'94\
\
\'93It\'92s a wonder,\'94 said she, with a grim smile. She was quieting down,\
was hiding the heart from which she had on impulse snatched the\
veil, was ashamed of her outburst. \'93A woman can talk about having a\
cancer, or a tumor, or any frightful disease inside her, and nobody\'92s\
modesty is shocked. But if she speaks of having a child within her--a\
wonderful, living human being--a lovely baby--why, it\'92s immodest!\'94 She\
gave a scornful laugh. \'93What a world! What a world!\'94\
\
I looked at her and marveled. What a world, indeed!--where _this_\
was one of the sort of relatives of whom pushing arrived people were\
ashamed!\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
I think I forced myself to stay three days with them. I cannot recall;\
perhaps I left the second day. However that may be, I have the sense of\
a long, a very long visit. To one who has the city habit the country\
is oppressively deliberate even when it is interesting. It makes you\
realize how there is room, and to spare, for sixty minutes in an hour,\
for sixty seconds in each minute. The city entertains; the country\
compels you to seek entertainment, to make entertainment. People whose\
mentality tapers away from mediocrity grow old and dull rapidly in\
the country as soon as childhood\'92s torrential life begins to slacken.\
For men of thought the country ought to be ideal, I should say, once\
they formed its habit and lost the city habit of waiting in confident\
expectation of being amused. But for men of action like myself, for men\
whose whole life is dealing directly with their fellow men, to acquire\
the country habit is a matter of years, of a complete revolution.\
\
I brought a sore and a sick heart to the country. I took back to town\
one that was on the way toward the normal. And I owed the improvement\
not to the country directly, but to my sister. Polly Ann had reminded\
me of the futility of graveyard mooning, of its egotism and hypocrisy.\
She had reminded me that only the fool walks backward through life.\
I believed I had been guilty of the folly of blowing a bubble of\
delusion, pretending to myself that it was no bubble, but permanent,\
substantial, real. The bubble had burst, as bubbles must--had burst\
with a mocking and irritating dash of cold spray straight into my face.\
Well!--the sensible thing to do, the only thing to do, was to laugh and\
blow no more bubbles.\
\
I went back to finance; I busied myself to the uttermost of my capacity\
for work. But I could not uproot the idea Mary Kirkwood had set growing\
in my mind. I saw ever more clearly that my sister was eternally right.\
Some men might be successful bachelors. I could be fairly successful\
at that selfish and solitary profession for a few years, perhaps\
for ten or fifteen years longer. But I knew with the clearness of a\
vision trained to search the horizon of the future that the feeling\
of loneliness, of complete futility which already shadowed me, would\
become a black pall. I _must_ have companionship; and to companionship\
there is but the one way--the way of wife and children. A poor, an\
uncertain way; nevertheless the only way.\
\
You have, perhaps, observed the marriages of the rich. You have noted\
that every rich man and every rich woman is surrounded by a smaller\
or larger army of satellites--persons nominally their social equals,\
often distinctly their mental superiors, salaried persons, wearers of\
cast-off clothing, eaters of luncheons and dinners, permanent free\
lodgers, constant or occasional pensioners more or less disguised.\
Family life fails with the rich as it fails with the well off, or with\
the poor. But while other classes revert to the herd life, the life of\
clubs, saloons, teas, receptions, the rich take up the parasite-beset\
life, each rich person aloof with his or her particular circle of\
flatterers, attendants, coat-holders, joke-makers, and boot-lickers.\
\
Now it so happened that for me there could be no enduring of this\
standing apart in the meadow, switching my tail while parasites bit\
and tickled, buzzed and burrowed. Riches, like any other heavy and\
constantly growing responsibility, usually rob a man of his sense of\
humor and turn his thoughts in upon himself and make him a ridiculous\
ass of an egotist. They had not had that effect upon me. I can give no\
reason; I simply state the fact. So, with my sense of humor active,\
and my sense of proportion fairly well balanced, I could not give\
myself up to the dreary life custom assigns to the rich. I retained the\
normal human instincts.\
\
I had hoped to satisfy them to the uttermost with the aid of Mary\
Kirkwood. That hope had fallen dead. I must search on--not for the best\
conceivable, but for the best possible.\
\
You are not surprised at my lack of sentiment, gentle reader. By this\
time, I am sure, I could not surprise you with any exhibition of\
that or other depravity. But it confirms your conviction of my utter\
sordidness. So? Then you imagine, do you, that there are many love\
marriages in the world, leaving out of the count those in novels and\
in the twaddling gossip men and women repeat as the true heart stories\
of this and that person? Yes, I should say your intelligence was\
about rudimentary enough to give you such a false notion of life as\
it is lived. Marriages of passion there are a-plenty. Rarely, indeed,\
does a man become bill-payer to a woman for life--not to speak of the\
insurance--without having been more or less agitated by her physical\
charms; and usually the woman, eager to be married, whips up for him\
a return feeling that looks well, convinces the man and herself,\
and makes you, gentle reader, sigh and wipe your sloppy eyes. But\
love-marriage--that\'92s a wholly different matter. I should say it almost\
never occurs. Where love, a sentiment of slow and reluctant growth,\
does happen occasionally to come afterwards, because the two are really\
congenial, really mated--where love does come afterwards, it did not\
exist when the wedding bells rang. And I doubt not that love has grown\
as often, if not oftener, where the motives that led to the marriage\
were practical and even sordid than where they were the bright, swift\
fading, and in death most foul-smelling, flowers of passion.\
\
I was willing to buy a wife, if I could find a woman who promised\
to wear well, to improve on acquaintance, or, at least, not to\
deteriorate. And, beyond question, with my money I could have taken\
my pick. Almost any girl anywhere, engaged or unengaged, would have\
fallen in love with me as soon as she discovered my charms--of person\
and of purse. Yes, would have fallen in love, gentle reader. Don\'92t you\
know that a nice, pure girl always makes herself, or lets herself, fall\
in love, before she gives herself? And don\'92t you know that, except\
falling out of love--out of that kind of love--there\'92s nothing easier,\
especially for an inexperienced girl, than falling in love--in that\
kind of love?\
\
But where was I to find a woman with enough solid quality to give me a\
reasonable hope that she would aid me in my quest for family happiness?\
\
Do not denounce me, gentle reader. Epithet and hiss are not reply.\
Answer my question.\
\
You say there are millions of such girls. Yes? But where?\
\
You say there are millions of pure, sweet, charming girls, intelligent\
and domestic. Yes. No doubt. But how long would they remain so if\
tempted by wealth, by the example of all the money-mad, luxury-mad,\
society-mad women about them?\
\
Mind you, I did not want a stupid rotter, a cow, a sitter and lounger\
and taker on of fat and slougher off of intelligence. I did not want\
the lazy slattern who poses as domestic, who is fond of home in exactly\
the same way that a pig is fond of an alley wallow.\
\
You laugh at me. You say: \'93He is a conceited fool!--to think that _he_\
could attract and absorb an intelligent woman with a complex woman\'92s\
soul!\'94 Not so, gentle reader. I did not wish to attract and to absorb\
her. As for the \'93complex woman\'92s soul,\'94 the less I saw or heard of it,\
the better pleased I\'92d be. I simply wanted a woman who would join me in\
being attracted by and absorbed in family life.\
\
You are still smiling mockingly. But let me tell you a few secrets of\
wisdom and happiness. First--Friendship is divine, but intimacy is the\
devil himself--unless it is the intimacy of the family. Second--To love\
your neighbor as yourself, he must be and must remain your neighbor,\
that is to say, within hail, but not within touch. Third--Husband,\
wife, and children are the only natural intimates--intimate because\
they have the bond of common interest. The family that looks abroad\
for intimates has ceased to be a family. Finally--A man who has his\
wife and children for intimates has neither need nor time for other\
intimates; and unless a man\'92s wife and children are his intimates, he\
has, in fact, no wife and no children. Let me add, for the benefit\
of--perhaps of you and your husband, gentle reader--that the only\
career worth having is built upon and with efficient work; careers made\
with friendships, gaddings, pulls, and the like would better be left\
unmade.\
\
You are smiling still, in your smug, supercilious fashion--smiling\
at what you promptly call old-fashioned trite truisms. I am not\
sure that, after they have been thought about a while, they would\
seem old-fashioned or stale. Rather, I flatter myself, they are\
the statement of a new philosophy of life. For the old theory\
with which you are confusing these truths was that the family is\
the _social unit_. In fact, it is not; the only _social_ units\
are individuals--capable individuals. My theory, or rather my\
philosophy--for it is more than a theory--my philosophy is that the\
family is the _unit of happiness_. Society can--and does--get along\
fairly well with little or no happiness. But happiness is an excellent\
thing, nevertheless. And _I_ wanted it.\
\
Now, perhaps, you see why I was not looking forward with any exuberance\
of optimism to finding the woman whom I needed and wanted, and who\
needed and wanted me. Prompted by my experiences and guided somewhat\
by my shrewd and cynical friend Bob Armitage, I had been giving no\
small amount of spare time to observing and thinking about the American\
woman. And while I admired that charming lady and found her an amusing\
companion for an occasional leisure hour, I saw that she was not to be\
taken seriously by a serious person. She knew how to look well, how\
to make a good \'93front,\'94 how to get perhaps a hundred dollars worth of\
pleasing surface results by squandering a thousand or two thousand\
dollars. As an ornament, a decoration, as a basket of rare inedible\
fruit to irradiate lovely costliness, she could not be beaten. As wife\
to a showy plutocrat, ignorant of the art of comfortable living, as\
head mistress to an European noble with servants trained to maintain\
his state in splendid and orderly discomfort, she would do excellently\
well. But not for the practical uses of sensible life. She had no\
training for them, no taste for them, no intention of adapting herself\
to them, whatever she might pretend in order to catch a bill-payer.\
\
Still, I did not despair. I dared not despair. If I had,\
loneliness--and heartache, yes, heartache--and my sense of present and\
future futility would have become intolerable. On the other hand, while\
there was every reason for haste--when happiness was my goal, and life\
is short and uncertain--I was resolved to be deliberate. If I should be\
deceived--perhaps by the girl\'92s honest self-deception--into choosing\
wrong, how she would hate me! For not again would, or could I let a\
woman use me as Edna had used me. A fool is a grown-up person who has\
never grown up. I had grown up--had become a definite person, knowing\
what I wanted and what I did not want. Such persons are hated by those\
who try in vain to use them. My one chance lay in finding a woman with\
the same definite tastes as mine. Only disaster could come through the\
woman who might marry me, pretending to agree with me and secretly\
resolved to \'93redeem\'94 me once she got me firmly in her grasp.\
\
Armitage was back in New York, was eager to resume our old relations.\
But that could not be. I had outgrown him. And he, at the dangerous\
age, was allowing himself to harden into all the habits of the rich\
class and of middle life. Despite his efforts to conceal it, I saw\
that he had even reached the pass where a man of property regards a\
new idea as a menace to society. If it is a new invention, it may make\
some stock he owns worthless. If it is a new social or political idea\
it may make his laborers demand higher wages, or in some other way\
affect his dividends. And, of course, whenever a man speaks of a menace\
to society, he means a menace to himself whom he naturally regards as\
the most precious and vital thread in the social fabric. Compelled by\
my need for ideas to occupy me in supplement to the now thoroughly\
familiar and rather monotonous routine of investing and reinvesting,\
organizing and reorganizing, I was associating more and more with\
artists and writers of the sort who feel suffocated in the society of\
the merely rich.\
\
Material conditions force upon men inexorable modes of life. And every\
mode of life breeds a definite, distinct set of ideas. Men fancy\
themselves original because they suddenly discover certain ideas in\
their brains. As well might a hen who has just eaten hot bran fancy\
herself original because she laid an egg. The idea was not from the\
man, but from his material conditions--lawyer idea, politician idea,\
banker idea, anarchist idea, big or little merchant idea, dog-fighter\
idea, professor idea, preacher idea, and so on. I was fighting to\
escape this to me repellent molding process--and I was making headway.\
But poor Armitage was rapidly yielding; his struggle, I fear, had been\
in its best days in large part a brassy make-believe--the valor of the\
trumpet, not of the sword.\
\
He was a sorry sight. His once handsome face was taking on that petty,\
pinched, frost-bitten Fifth Avenue expression. And he had been driven\
for companionship into forming the familiar parasite circle. The chief\
figures in it were a decaying dandy of an old New York family who had\
been fawner and crumb snapper all his days, and a broken-down plutocrat\
who had squandered his fortune on fine women, fine wine, and fine food.\
The dandy gave Bob the fashionable gossip; the broken-down plutocrat\
gave him the gossip and scandal of the giddy part of town, also the\
latest gamey stories; also he--perhaps both--arranged for him the\
peculiar pleasures of the rich man with the palate that needs strong\
sensations to make it respond.\
\
Armitage was out of the question for me. Then----\
\
I drifted into the Amsterdam Club one evening--to write a note or send\
a telegram--and there sat Hartley Beechman. The instant he saw me he\
sprang up and made straight for me. His expression was puzzling, but\
not hostile--still, I was unobtrusively ready. Said he in a straight,\
frank fashion:\
\
\'93Loring, I want to apologize to you. I made a damned ass of myself\
in Green Park last summer. My excuse is that I was more than half\
crazy----\'94\
\
I put out my hand. \'93I half guessed at the time,\'94 said I. \'93I know all\
about it now.\'94\
\
We looked at each other with the friendliness that has become the\
stronger by a mended break--for broken hearts and broken lives and\
broken friendships are much the stronger if the break mends. Said he:\
\
\'93One way of measuring the strength of a man is the length of the\
intervals between the times when he makes a fool of himself about a\
woman. My first came at eighteen, my next at thirty-eight. Not a bad\
showing, I flatter myself--eh?\'94\
\
\'93Uncommonly good,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93And the second shall be the last.\'94\
\
\'93Optimism!\'94 I warned him laughingly. \'93Beware of optimism!\'94\
\
\'93No. I shall write about women, but I\'92ll see no more of them. I\'92ve\
got hold of myself again. I\'92m as good as ever--better than ever,\
probably. But--it cost! And I\'92ll not pay that price again. For a while\
I thought it was you who had upset my happiness. Then--\'94 He gave a\
loud, unnatural laugh--\'93That German purchase! I saw she had been simply\
playing with me. You know how fond women of that sort are of playing\
with romantic or sentimental ideas. But when it came to the test--why,\
she would have married only a fortune or a title.\'94\
\
I made no comment. He was saying only what I thought, what I believed\
true. But I hated to hear it.\
\
\'93I may wrong her,\'94 pursued he reflectively. \'93Not altogether, but to a\
certain extent. I rather think the impulse to something saner and less\
vulgar was there--actually there.\'94\
\
As he was looking at me inquiringly I said: \'93I think so.\'94\
\
\'93But--nothing came of it. And there\'92s little in these fine impulses of\
which nothing comes.\'94\
\
\'93Little?\'94 laughed I. \'93Why, they produce the most beautiful decorative\
effects. Life would be barren without them. What a repulsive sight\
the poor little human animal would be, grunting and grubbing about,\
thinking always of its beloved self--what a repulsive sight if it\
didn\'92t wear the flowers of high ideals in its ears--and the jewels of\
fine impulses ringed in its nose.\'94\
\
\'93_I_ think it would look better without them,\'94 said he. \'93Less\
ridiculous--less contemptible.\'94\
\
\'93To you--yes. Because you\'92re like I am--coarse. But not to itself and\
its fellows.\'94\
\
\'93I\'92m going back to the woods to-morrow,\'94 said he.\
\
\'93Better come on a yachting trip to South America with me,\'94 said I.\
\
He flushed. \'93Thank you--but I can\'92t do that,\'94 replied he. \'93I can\'92t\
afford it.\'94\
\
It was my turn to flush. \'93I beg your pardon,\'94 I said. \'93I spoke without\
thinking--spoke on impulse. You are quite right.\'94\
\
\'93A man\'92s a fool or a sycophant who goes where he can\'92t pay his own\
way,\'94 continued he. \'93I\'92ve come to realize that. I\'92ll do it no more.\
I\'92ll stick to my own class. I\'92ve been justly punished for blundering\
out of it. But not so severely punished as I should have been had my--\'94\
he smiled ironically--\'93my love affair prospered.\'94\
\
He thought for several minutes, then he said: \'93I wonder--when the clash\
came--would I have gone with her or she with me?\'94\
\
I did not reply.\
\
He pulled himself together, smiled mockingly at his own folly of\
lingering near the unsightly and not too aromatic corpse. \'93I must get\
into the woods and breathe it out of my system. Did you see the account\
of the arrangements for her approaching marriage in this evening\'92s\
paper? Nearly a page--and I read every line.\'94\
\
When he had finished his drink he rose and departed--and I have not\
talked with him since. He resumed his career; we all know how brilliant\
it is. As I have said before, I have no sympathy with the silly notion,\
bruited about by silly flabby people that women ruin the lives of\
strong men. Now and then a woman may be the proverbial last straw that\
breaks the camel\'92s back. But there\'92s a vast difference between woman\
the actuality, woman the mere last straw, and woman the vampire, the\
scarlet destroyer as portrayed in novels and so-called histories. Those\
mighty men, made or ruined by women--why do we never _see_ them, why do\
we only read about them?\
\
I resisted the temptation to follow Beechman\'92s example and read the\
newspaper account of Mary Kirkwood\'92s approaching apotheosis into the\
heaven that is the dream of all true American ladies. There is but\
one way to do a thing--and that is to do it. I had destroyed or sent\
back the letters; I had resisted the telegram. I could not yet bar my\
mind from wandering to her. But I could avoid leading it to her--and\
I did. So it was by accident that, the following week, I one morning\
let my eye take in the whole of a four-line newspaper paragraph before\
I realized what it was about. The purport was that the engagement\
between Count von Tilzer-Borgfeldt and Mrs. Kirkwood had been broken\
off because of a \'93failure to agree as to settlements.\'94 This, in the\
same newspaper that contained two columns descriptive of the quietly\
gorgeous marriage of Frascatoni and Edna in my son-in-law\'92s new house\
near London.\
\
\'93Failure to agree as to settlements--\'94 Faugh!\
\
I had calmed until all my anger against her was gone and I was thinking\
of her as merely human, as the result of her environment like everyone\
else. I believed now that where she had deceived me she had also\
deceived herself. And I saw as clearly as in the days of my infatuation\
that she and I had been made for each other, that our coming together\
had been one of those rare meetings of two who are entirely congenial.\
It filled me with sadness that fate had not been kind instead of\
sardonically cruel, had not brought us together ten years earlier,\
before the world had poisoned her originally simple and sincere nature.\
But how absurd to linger over impossible might-have-beens! I had gone\
as far as I cared to go in the company of those who have made fools of\
themselves for love.\
\
I believed I could trust myself with her in the same neighborhood. But\
I was not sure, and I would take no chance. A few days after I read of\
the broken engagement I departed on the yachting trip to South America.\
\
\
\
\
XIV\
\
\
There were but two in my party--Dugdale, the playwright, and myself.\
A more amusing man than Dugdale never lived. He was amusing both\
consciously and unconsciously. A mountain of a man--bone and muscle,\
little fat. He had eyes that were large, but were so habitually\
squinted, the better to see every detail of everything, that they\
seemed small; and his expression, severe to the verge of savageness,\
changed the instant he spoke into childlike simplicity and good humor.\
He made money easily--large sums of money--for he had the talent for\
success. But he spent long before he made. I think it must have been\
his secret ambition to owe everybody in the world--except his friends.\
From a friend he never borrowed. The general belief was that he had\
never paid back a loan--and I have no reason to doubt it. What did he\
do with his borrowings? Loaned them to his friends who were hard up. If\
the list of those he owed was long, the list of those who owed him was\
longer. If he never paid back, neither was he ever paid.\
\
He could work at sea, or anywhere else--no doubt even in a balloon.\
On that trip he toiled prodigiously, crouched over a foolish little\
table in his cabin, smoking endless cigarettes and setting down with\
incredible rapidity illegible words in a tiny writing that contrasted\
grotesquely with the enormous hand holding the pencil. He labored\
altogether at night, after I had gone to bed. He was always astir\
before me. He slept unbelievably little, probably kept up on the\
quantities of whisky he drank. However that may be, he was as active by\
day physically as he was mentally by night. He was all over the boat,\
always finding something to do--something for me as well as for himself.\
\
The only terms on which Dugdale would consent to go were that I should\
keep him away from New York not less than two months, and that I\
should take no one else. I promptly assented to both conditions. It\
was not the first time he had put me under a heavy debt of gratitude\
for congenial society. We had made several long trips together, always\
with satisfaction on both sides. Whatever else you may think of me, I\
hope I have at least convinced you that I am not one of those rich men\
who rely for consideration upon their wealth. I believe I am one of the\
few rich men who can justly claim that distinction. When I ask a man\
less well off than I am to dine with me--or to accept my hospitality\
in any way--I ask him because I want him. And I do not either directly\
or indirectly try to make him feel that he is being honored. I would\
not ask the sort of man who feels honored by being in the society of\
bank accounts or of any other glittering symbols in substitute for\
good-fellowship.\
\
You will see, gentle reader, that my list was short indeed.\
\
It is one of the not few drawbacks of riches that they rouse the\
instinct of cupidity in nearly all human beings. The rich man\
glances round at a circle of constrained faces, each more or less\
unsuccessfully striving to veil from him the glistening eye and the\
watery lip of the gold hunger. Probably you know how pepsin is got for\
the market--how they pen pigs so that their snouts almost touch food\
which they can by no straining and struggling reach; how the unhappy\
creatures soon begin to drip, then to slobber, then to stream into\
the receiving trough under their jaws the pepsin which the sight of\
the food starts their stomachs to secreting. As I have looked at the\
parasite circles of some of my friends I have often been reminded of\
the pepsin pigs. Some of my friends like these displays, encourage them\
in every way, associate solely with pepsin pigs. I confess I have never\
acquired the least taste for that sort of entertainment.\
\
I have traveled the world over, and everywhere I have found men either\
industriously engaged in cringing or looking hopefully about for some\
one to cringe to them. Well--what of it?\
\
I owe Dugdale a debt I cannot hope to repay. He, a light-hearted\
philosopher, made me light-hearted. He kept my sense of humor and my\
sense of proportion constantly active. There is a stripe of philosopher\
of the light-hearted variety who lets his perception of the fundamental\
futility of life and all that therein is discourage him from everything\
but cynical laughter at himself and at the world. That sort is a\
shallow ass, fit company for no one but the bleary, blowsy wrecks to\
whose level he rapidly sinks. Dugdale--and I--were of the other school.\
We did not--at least, not habitually--exaggerate our own importance.\
It caused no swelling of the head in him that his name was known\
wherever people went to the theater, or in me that I usually had to be\
taken into account when they did anything important in finance. We did\
not measure the world or rank its inhabitants according to the silly\
standards in general use. But at the same time we appreciated that to\
work and to work well was the only sensible way to pass the few swift\
years assigned us.\
\
It takes a serious man to make even a good joke. A frivolous person can\
do nothing. That is why so many of our American women, and so many of\
the men, too, sink into insignificance as soon as the first freshness\
of youth is gone from them. Youth has charm simply as youth because it\
seems to be a brilliant promise. When the promise goes to protest the\
charm vanishes.\
\
I shall reserve what I saw and heard in South America for another\
volume, one of a different kind. I shall go forward to the following\
spring when I was once more in New York. Edna and her daughter--so\
I read in the newspapers--were living in fitting estate in a famous\
villa they had taken in the fashionable part of the south of France,\
\'93for the health of the two young sons of the marchioness.\'94 Frascatoni\
was gambling at Monte Carlo, Crossley was at his government post in\
London. I could fill in the tiresome details for both the wives and the\
husbands--and so, probably, can you. While some business matters were\
settling, I was turning over in my mind plans for making a systematic\
search for a wife.\
\
I count on your amusement confidently, gentle reader. If you wished a\
fresh egg for your breakfast or a suit of clothes to be worn a few\
weeks and discarded, or an automobile, you would set about getting it\
with some attention to the best ways and means. But, saturated as you\
are with silly sentimentalities about marriage, you believe that the\
most important matter in the world--the matter which determines your\
own happiness or unhappiness and also the current of posterity--you\
believe that such a matter should be left to the lottery of chance!\
Well, I had long since abandoned that delusion, and I purposed to\
establish my life with as much thought and care as I gave all other\
matters.\
\
\'93A dull fellow,\'94 you are saying. \'93No wonder his wife fled from him.\'94\
\
I do not wonder that you regard as dull anything that is intelligent.\
To ignorance intelligence must necessarily seem dull. When any subject\
of real interest is brought up, some silly, empty-headed pretty woman\
is sure to say, \'93How dull! Let\'92s talk of something interesting.\'94 And\
there will always be a chorus of laughing assent--because the woman is\
pretty. So I accept your sneer at me with a certain pleasure. I wish\
to be thought dull by some people, including some women very good to\
look at. But out of vanity and in fairness to Edna I must acquit her of\
having thought me dull--after she had been about the world.\
\
One evening at the Federal Club I fell in with my old acquaintance,\
Sam Cauldwell, the fashionable physician. He was something more than\
that--or had been--but was too lazy to use his mind when his gift\
for sympathetic and flattering gab brought him in plenty of money.\
Cauldwell was a trained, thoroughgoing sycophant and snob. But he saw\
the humorous aspect of the gods he was on his knees before--and saw the\
humor of his being there. He knew the kind of man I was, and liked to\
take me aside and make sport of his deities for an hour over a bottle\
of wine. Also--he liked the idea of being, and of being seen, intimate\
with a man conspicuous for wealth and for the social position of his\
family--the ex-husband of a princess, the father of a marchioness.\
Gentle reader, if you wish to see human nature to its depth, you\
must occupy such a position as mine. Believe me, you are mistaken in\
thinking the traits you shamedly hide are unique. There are others like\
you--many others.\
\
Cauldwell was perhaps ten years older than I, but being a\
well-taken-care-of New Yorker, he passed for a young man--which,\
indeed, he was. I do not regard fifty as anything but young unless it\
insists upon another estimate by looking older than it really is. I\
shall assuredly be young at fifty, perhaps younger than I am now, for\
I take better care of my health every year--and I have health worth\
taking care of. But, as I was about to say, Cauldwell had a meditative\
look that night as we sat down to dinner together. And when he had\
drunk his third glass of champagne he said:\
\
\'93Loring, why the devil don\'92t you get married?\'94\
\
I felt that he had something especial to say to me. I answered\
indifferently, \'93Why don\'92t _you_?\'94\
\
\'93Very simple,\'94 replied he. \'93Not rich enough. To marry in New York a man\
must be either a pauper or a Cr\'9csus.\'94\
\
\'93Then marry a rich girl,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92d have done it long ago if I could,\'94 he confessed with a laugh. \'93But\
I\'92ve never been able to get at the girls who are rich enough. Their\
mammas guard them for plutocrats or titles. But you-- Really, it\'92s a\
shame for you to stay single. I know a dozen women who\'92re losing sleep\
longing for you--for themselves, or for some lovely young daughter.\'94\
\
\'93Pathetic,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I see that irritates you. Well--you needn\'92t be alarmed. You\'92re famed\
for being about the wariest bird in the preserves. And I know you don\'92t\
want that kind of woman. Why not take the kind you do want?\'94\
\
\'93Where is she?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I could name a dozen,\'94 rejoined he. \'93But I shan\'92t name any. I have one\
in mind. A doctor has the best opportunity in the world to find out\
about women--about men, too--the truth about them.\'94\
\
I laughed. \'93If I wanted misinformation about human nature,\'94 said I,\
\'93I\'92d go to a doctor--or a preacher. They\'92re the depositories of all the\
hysterical tommyrot, all the sentimental lies that vain women and men\
think out about themselves and their sex relations.\'94\
\
His smile was not a denial. \'93Yes, I\'92ve been rather credulous, I\'92ll\
admit,\'94 said he. \'93And men and women do tell the most astounding\
whoppers about themselves. Especially women, having trouble with their\
husbands. I try not to believe, but I\'92m caught every once in a while.\'94\
\
A gleam in his eye made me wonder whether he wasn\'92t thinking of some\
yarn Edna had spun for him about me. Probably. There are precious few\
women, even among the fairly close-mouthed, who don\'92t take advantage\
of the family doctor to indulge in the passion for romancing.\
\
\'93But I wasn\'92t thinking of any confession,\'94 he went on. \'93Several women\
have confessed a secret passion for you to me--with the hope that I\'92d\
help them. The woman I have in mind isn\'92t that sort. I don\'92t know that\
she cares anything about you. I only know that she\'92s exactly the woman\
for you.\'94\
\
\'93Interesting,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93She\'92s young--unusually pretty--and in a distinguished way. She knows\
how to run a house as a home--and she\'92s about the only woman I know in\
our class who does. She\'92s got a good mind--not for a woman, but for\
anybody. And she needs a husband and children and a home.\'94\
\
He must have misunderstood the peculiar expression of my face, for he\
hastened on:\
\
\'93Not that she\'92s poor. On the contrary, she\'92s rich. I\'92d not recommend a\
poor girl to you. Poor girls can think of nothing but money--naturally.\'94\
\
\'93Everybody, rich and poor, thinks of money--naturally,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Guess you\'92re right,\'94 laughed he. \'93But it _looks_ worse in a poor girl.\'94\
\
\'93I should say the opposite. A feeding glutton looks worse than a\
feeding famished man.\'94\
\
\'93At any rate--this woman I have in mind isn\'92t poor. That\'92s not a\
disadvantage, is it?\'94\
\
\'93Not a hopeless obstacle,\'94 said I. \'93By the way, what _are_ her\
disadvantages?\'94\
\
\'93Well--she\'92s been married before.\'94\
\
\'93So have I,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93But, on the other hand, she has no children.\'94\
\
\'93Neither have I,\'94 said I, without thinking. I hastened to add, \'93My only\
child is married.\'94\
\
\'93And splendidly married,\'94 said he with the snob\'92s enthusiasm.\
\
\'93To return to the lady,\'94 said I dryly. \'93Why don\'92t you marry her\
yourself?\'94\
\
He had drunk several more glasses of the champagne. He laughed. \'93She\
wouldn\'92t look at _me_. She sees straight through me. She wants a\
man with domestic tastes. I\'92m about as fit for domestic life as a\
fire-engine horse for an old maid\'92s ph\'e6ton.\'94\
\
\'93Well--who is it?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I\'92m afraid you\'92ll think she\'92s been at me to help her. But, on my\
honor, Loring, she isn\'92t that sort. We\'92ve talked of you. For some\
reason, ever since I\'92ve known her--well, I\'92ve never seen her without\
thinking of you. I often talk of you to her--not marrying talk--I\'92d not\
dare--but in a friendly sort of way. She listens--says nothing.\'94\
\
\'93But she is sickly,\'94 said I.\
\
\'93Sickly?\'94 he cried. He looked horrified and amazed. \'93Good Lord, what\
gave you that notion?\'94\
\
\'93You said you saw her often.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, I see. It was her brother who had the illness.\'94\
\
\'93All right. Bring her round and I\'92ll look her over,\'94 said I carelessly.\
And I forced a change of subject.\
\
Had Mary Kirkwood been taking this agreeable, insidious doctor into\
her confidence? I did not know. I do not know. I have reasons for\
thinking he told the literal truth. And yet--women are queer about\
doctors. However, that\'92s a small matter. The thing that impressed me,\
that agitated me as he talked, was the picture he, by implication,\
was making of Mary Kirkwood, alone again, and evidently absolutely\
unattached--living alone in the country as when I first knew her.\
\
I tossed and fretted away most of the hours of that night with the\
result that at breakfast I resolved to leave town again, to put the\
width of the continent or of the ocean between me and temptation to\
folly. But one thing and another came up to detain me. It was perhaps\
ten days later that I, walking alone in the Park, as was my habit,\
found myself at a turning face to face with her. I don\'92t think my\
expression reflected credit upon my boasted self-control. As for her--I\
thought she was going to faint--and she is not one of the fainting\
kind. We gazed at each other in fright and embarrassment, and both\
had the same child\'92s impulse to turn and fly--one, of those sensible,\
natural instincts for the shortest way out of difficult situations that\
the cowardly conventionality of the grown-up estate makes it impossible\
to obey. But--we had to do something. So, we laughed.\
\
She put out her hand; I took it. \'93How well you are looking,\'94 said\
I--and it was the truth.\
\
\'93You, too,\'94 said she.\
\
I turned to walk with her. We strolled along cheerfully and\
contentedly, talking of the early spring, of flowers, and birds, and\
such neutral matters. I was fluent, she no less so. Our agitation\
disappeared; our sense of congeniality returned. Our acquaintance\
seemed to have lumped back to where it was before we had that first\
confidential talk together on the yacht. After perhaps an hour, as\
agreeable an hour as I ever spent, she said she must go home, as she\
had an engagement. On the way to the Sixty-fifth Street entrance the\
conversation lagged somewhat. We were both busily resolving the same\
thing--the matter of explanations. Now that I was seeing her again--a\
wholly different matter from inspecting my defaced and smirched and\
battered image of her--battered by the blows of my jealousy, and\
anger, and scorn--now that I was seeing _her_ again, I could not but\
see and feel that she was in reality a sweet and simple and attractive\
woman. No doubt she had her faults--as all of us have--grave faults of\
inheritance, of education, of environment. But who was I that I should\
sit in judgment on her? I realized that I had judged her unjustly so\
far as her treatment of me was concerned. Assuming that she was tainted\
with snobbishness, assuming that her defects were as bad as I had\
thought in my worst paroxysms, still that did not alter the charms and\
the fine qualities.\
\
\'93We are friends?\'94 said I abruptly.\
\
\'93I hope so,\'94 said she. She added: \'93I know so.\'94\
\
\'93Without discussion or explanation?\'94\
\
\'93That is best--don\'92t you think?\'94 replied she. \'93I am--not--not proud of\
some things I did.\'94\
\
\'93Nor I, of some things I did.\'94\
\
\'93I should like to forget them--my own and yours.\'94\
\
\'93I, too. And explanations do not explain. Let sleeping dogs lie.\'94\
\
She smiled and nodded. She said:\
\
\'93The latter part of the week I\'92m going back to the country. Perhaps\
you\'92ll spend Saturday and Sunday there?\'94\
\
\'93Thank you,\'94 said I. \'93Let me know at the Federal Club if your plans\
change.\'94\
\
At her door we shook hands, but both lingered. Said she:\
\
\'93I am glad we are friends again.\'94\
\
\'93It was inevitable,\'94 I replied. \'93We _like_ each other too well not to\
have come round. Bitternesses and enmities are stupid.\'94\
\
\'93And sad,\'94 said she.\
\
When we met again--at her house in the country--there was no\
constraint on either side. We knew that neither of us had the power to\
breach, much less to remove, the barrier between us. We ignored its\
existence--and were content.\
\
You may have observed that I have rarely been able to speak of Edna\
without resentment. I shall now tell you why:\
\
The friendship between Mary Kirkwood and me presently set the\
newspaper gossips to talking. Our engagement was announced again and\
again--the announcement always a pretext for rehashing the story of the\
matrimonial bankruptcy through which each had passed. But as we were\
above the reach of the missiles of the scandalmongers the worst that\
was printed produced only a slight and brief irritation. This until\
the Princess Frascatoni began her campaign of slander.\
\
I shall not go into it. I shall simply say that she ordered one of\
her hangers-on--one of the semi-literary parasites to be found in the\
train of every rich person--to attack Mary and me as keeping up an\
intrigue of long standing, the one that was the real cause of my wife\'92s\
divorcing me. When I read the first of these articles I believed, from\
certain details, that no one in the world but the Princess Frascatoni\
could have inspired it. But with my habitual caution I leashed my\
impetuous anger and did not condemn her until I had investigated. Is it\
not strange, is it not the irony of fate that in every serious crisis\
of my life, except one, I should have had coolness and self-control,\
and that the one exception should have been when I loved Mary Kirkwood\
and condemned her unheard? After all, I am not sure that love isn\'92t a\
kind of lunacy.\
\
Why did Edna engage in that campaign of slander? Why did she say\
to everyone from this side the most malicious, the most mendacious\
things about my relations with Mrs. Kirkwood--that she had ignored the\
intrigue as long as she could for the sake of her dear daughter; that\
it had driven her from New York, had forced her to get a divorce, and\
so on through the gamut of malignant lying? There may perhaps be a clew\
to the mystery in the failure of her second marriage--as a marriage,\
I mean; not, of course, as a social enterprise, for there it was a\
world-renowned success. If the clew is not in Edna\'92s emptiness of heart\
and boredom, then I can suggest no explanation. I imagine she had been\
hearing and reading the gossip about an impending marriage between\
Mrs. Kirkwood and me until she had concluded that there must be truth\
in it--and by outrageous slander she hoped to make it impossible.\
\
The first effect was as she had probably calculated. Mary and I avoided\
each other. Mary hid herself and would see no one. Armitage and I for\
a time kept up a pretense of close friendship, or, rather, publicly\
again pretended a friendship that had long since all but ceased. But\
when the talk both in the newspapers and among our acquaintances grew\
until the \'93at last uncovered scandal\'94 was the chief topic of gossip, he\
and I almost stopped speaking. You may wonder why he or I or both of us\
did not \'93do something\'94 to crush the absurd lie. Gentle reader, did you\
ever try to kill a scandal? It is done in novels and on the stage; but\
in life the silly ass who draws his sword and attacks a pestilent fog\
accomplishes nothing--beyond attracting more attention to the fog by\
his absurd and futile gesticulations. The world had made up its nasty\
little mind that the relations between Mary Kirkwood, divorced, and\
Godfrey Loring, divorced, were not, and for years had not been, what\
they should be. And the matter was settled. I think Armitage himself\
believed. I know Beechman believed, for he pointedly crossed the street\
to avoid speaking to me.\
\
I stood this for a month. Then I went down to Mary\'92s place on Long\
Island.\
\
You may imagine the excitement my coming caused among the honest\
yeomanry gathered at the station--those worthy folk who peep and pry\
into the business of their fashionable overlords, and are learning\
to cringe like English peasants. I found Mary setting out for a\
ride--through her own grounds; she was ashamed to venture abroad.\
I came upon her abruptly. Instead of the terror and aversion I had\
steeled myself to meet, I got a radiance of welcome that made my heart\
leap. But in an instant she had remembered and was almost in a panic.\
\
\'93Please send the groom away with the horse,\'94 said I. \'93Let us walk up\
and down here before the house.\'94\
\
She hesitated, obeyed.\
\
The broad space before the house was laid out in hedges and blooming\
beds with a long, straight drive leading in one direction to the\
highroad, in the other direction to stable, carriage house, and garage.\
When we were securely alone I said:\
\
\'93Have you missed me?\'94\
\
\'93Our friendship meant a lot to me,\'94 replied she.\
\
\'93I have discovered that it\'92s the principal thing in my life,\'94 said I.\
\
We paced the length of the drive toward the lodge in silence. As we\
turned toward the house again I said:\
\
\'93I have chartered the largest yacht I could get--for a cruise round the\
world.\'94\
\
A pause, then she in a constrained voice: \'93When do you start?\'94\
\
\'93Immediately,\'94 I answered. \'93Perhaps to-morrow.\'94\
\
She halted, leaned against a tree, and gazed out through the shrubbery.\
\
\'93You\'92ve not been well?\'94 said I.\
\
\'93I never am, when I lose interest in life,\'94 replied she. \'93You will be\
gone--long?\'94\
\
\'93Long,\'94 said I. \'93Either we shall not see each other again for\
years--or--\'94 I paused.\
\
After a wait of fully a minute she looked inquiringly at me.\
\
\'93Mary,\'94 said I, \'93shall we take a motor launch and go over to\
Connecticut and be married?\'94\
\
She began to walk again, I keeping pace with her. \'93It\'92s the only\
sensible thing to do,\'94 said I. \'93It\'92s the only way out of this mess. And\
to-morrow we\'92ll sail away and not come back until--until we are good\
and ready.\'94\
\
I waited a moment, then went on, and I had the feeling that I was\
saying what we were both thinking: \'93We\'92ve had the same experience--have\
been through the same bankruptcy. It has taught us, I think--I hope--I\
can\'92t be sure; human nature learns slowly and badly. But I see a good\
chance for us--not to be utterly and always blissfully happy, but to\
get far more out of life than either is getting--or could get alone.\'94\
\
As we turned at the group of outbuildings she looked at me and I at\
her--a look straight into each other\'92s souls. And then and there was\
born that which alone can make a marriage successful or a life worth\
the living. What is the difference between friendship and love? I had\
thought--and said--that love was friendship in bloom. But as Mary and I\
looked at each other, I knew the full truth. Love is friendship set on\
fire. We did not speak. We glanced hastily away. At the front door she\
halted. In a quiet, awed voice she said:\
\
\'93I\'92ll change from this riding suit.\'94\
\
And what did I say, gentle reader, to commemorate our standing upon\
holy ground? I did no better than she. With eyes uncertain and voice\
untrustworthy and hoarse I said:\
\
\'93And tell your maid to pack and go to town with the trunks--go to the\
landing at East Twenty-third Street. Can she be there by four or five\
this afternoon?\'94\
\
\'93Yes.\'94\
\
\'93Then I\'92ll see you at the bay--at the launch wharf--in half an hour?\
I\'92ve got to send off a telegram.\'94\
\
\'93In half an hour,\'94 said she, and with a grave smile and a wave of her\
crop she disappeared into the house.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
At seven that evening we steamed past Sandy Hook. At ten--after an\
almost silent dinner--we were on deck, leaning side by side at the\
rail, near the bow. We were alone on the calm and shining sea. No land\
in sight, not a steamer, not a sail--not a sign of human existence\
beyond the rail of our yacht. Her arm slipped within mine; my hand\
sought hers. Not a sail, not a streamer of smoke. Alone and free and\
together.\
\
       *       *       *       *       *\
\
I forgive you, gentle reader. Go in peace.\
\
\
THE END\
\
\
\
\
TITLES SELECTED FROM\
\
GROSSET & DUNLAP\'92S LIST\
\
May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap\'92s list.\
\
\
_THE SECOND WIFE._ By Thompson Buchanan. Illustrated by W. W. Fawcett.\
Harrison Fisher wrapper printed in four colors and gold.\
\
An intensely interesting story of a marital complication in a wealthy\
New York family involving the happiness of a beautiful young girl.\
\
\
_TESS OF THE STORM COUNTRY._ By Grace Miller White. Illustrated by\
  Howard Chandler Christy.\
\
An amazingly vivid picture of low class life in a New\
York college town, with a heroine beautiful and noble, who makes\
a great sacrifice for love.\
\
\
_FROM THE VALLEY OF THE MISSING._ By Grace Miller White. Frontispiece\
  and wrapper in colors by Penrhyn Stanlaws.\
\
Another story of \'93the storm country.\'94 Two beautiful children\
are kidnapped from a wealthy home and appear many years\
after showing the effects of a deep, malicious scheme behind\
their disappearance.\
\
\
_THE LIGHTED MATCH._ By Charles Neville Buck. Illustrated by R. F.\
  Schabelitz.\
\
A lovely princess travels incognito through the States and\
falls in love with an American man. There are ties that bind her\
to someone in her own home, and the great plot revolves round\
her efforts to work her way out.\
\
\
_MAUD BAXTER._ By C. C. Hotchkiss. Illustrated by Will Grefe.\
\
A romance both daring and delightful, involving an American\
girl and a young man who had been impressed into English\
service during the Revolution.\
\
\
_THE HIGHWAYMAN._ By Guy Rawlence. Illustrated by Will Grefe.\
\
A French beauty of mysterious antecedents wins the love\
of an Englishman of title. Developments of a startling character\
and a clever untangling of affairs hold the reader\'92s interest.\
\
\
_THE PURPLE STOCKINGS._ By Edward Salisbury Field. Illustrated in\
  colors; marginal illustrations.\
\
A young New York business man, his pretty sweetheart,\
his sentimental stenographer, and his fashionable sister are all\
mixed up in a misunderstanding that surpasses anything in the\
way of comedy in years. A story with a laugh on every page.\
\
_Ask for complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_\
\
\
\
\
A FEW OF\
GROSSET & DUNLAP\'92S\
Great Books at Little Prices\
\
\
WHEN A MAN MARRIES. By Mary Roberts Rinehart. Illustrated by Harrison\
  Fisher and Mayo Bunker.\
\
A young artist, whose wife had recently divorced him, finds that\
a visit is due from his Aunt Selina, an elderly lady having ideas\
about things quite apart from the Bohemian set in which her\
nephew is a shining light. The way in which matters are temporarily\
adjusted forms the motif of the story.\
\
A farcical extravaganza, dramatised under the title of \'93Seven Days.\'94\
\
\
THE FASHIONABLE ADVENTURES OF JOSHUA CRAIG. By David Graham Phillips.\
  Illustrated.\
\
A young westerner, uncouth and unconventional, appears in\
political and social life in Washington. He attains power in politics,\
and a young woman of the exclusive set becomes his wife, undertaking\
his education in social amenities.\
\
\
\'93DOC.\'94 GORDON. By Mary E. Wilkins-Freeman. Illustrated by Frank T.\
  Merrill.\
\
Against the familiar background of American town life, the\
author portrays a group of people strangely involved in a mystery.\
\'93Doc.\'94 Gordon, the one physician of the place, D. Elliot, his\
assistant, a beautiful woman and her altogether charming daughter\
are all involved in the plot. A novel of great interest.\
\
\
HOLY ORDERS. By Marie Corelli.\
\
A dramatic story, in which is pictured a clergyman in touch with\
society people, stage favorites, simple, common village folk, powerful\
financiers and others, each presenting vital problems to this man \'93in\
holy orders\'94--problems that we are now struggling with in America.\
\
\
KATRINE. By Elinor Macartney Lane. With frontispiece.\
\
Katrine, the heroine of this story, is a lovely Irish girl, of lowly\
birth, but gifted with a beautiful voice.\
\
The narrative is based on the facts of an actual singer\'92s career,\
and the viewpoint throughout is a most exalted one.\
\
\
THE FORTUNES OF FIFI. By Molly Elliot Seawell. Illustrated by T. de\
  Thulstrup.\
\
A story of life in France at the time of the first Napoleon. Fifi,\
a glad, mad little actress of eighteen, is the star performer in a third\
rate Parisian theatre. A story as dainty as a Watteau painting.\
\
\
SHE THAT HESITATES. By Harris Dickson. Illustrated by C. W. Relyea.\
\
The scene of this dashing romance shifts from Dresden to St.\
Petersburg in the reign of Peter the Great, and then to New Orleans.\
\
The hero is a French Soldier of Fortune, and the princess, who\
hesitates--but you must read the story to know how she that hesitates\
may be lost and yet saved.\
\
\
\
\
TITLES SELECTED FROM\
GROSSET & DUNLAP\'92S LIST\
\
REALISTIC, ENGAGING PICTURES OF LIFE\
\
\
THE GARDEN OF FATE. By Roy Norton. Illustrated by Joseph Clement Coll.\
\
The colorful romance of an American girl in Morocco, and\
of a beautiful garden, whose beauty and traditions of strange\
subtle happenings were closed to the world by a Sultan\'92s seal.\
\
\
THE MAN HIGHER UP. By Henry Russell Miller. Full page vignette\
  illustrations by M. Leone Bracker.\
\
The story of a tenement waif who rose by his own ingenuity\
to the office of mayor of his native city. His experiences\
while \'93climbing,\'94 make a most interesting example of the\
possibilities of human nature to rise above circumstances.\
\
\
THE KEY TO YESTERDAY. By Charles Neville Buck. Illustrated by R.\
  Schabelitz.\
\
Robert Saxon, a prominent artist, has an accident, while in\
Paris, which obliterates his memory, and the only clue he has\
to his former life is a rusty key. What door in Paris will it\
unlock? He must know that before he woos the girl he loves.\
\
\
THE DANGER TRAIL. By James Oliver Curwood. Illustrated by Charles\
  Livingston Bull.\
\
The danger trail is over the snow-smothered North. A\
young Chicago engineer, who is building a road through the\
Hudson Bay region, is involved in mystery, and is led into\
ambush by a young woman.\
\
\
THE GAY LORD WARING. By Houghton Townley. Illustrated by Will Grefe.\
\
A story of the smart hunting set in England. A gay young\
lord wins in love against his selfish and cowardly brother and\
apparently against fate itself.\
\
\
BY INHERITANCE. By Octave Thanet. Illustrated by Thomas Fogarty.\
  Elaborate wrapper in colors.\
\
A wealthy New England spinster with the most elaborate\
plans for the education of the negro goes to visit her nephew\
in Arkansas, where she learns the needs of the colored race\
first hand and begins to lose her theories.\
\
\
\
\
A FEW OF\
GROSSET & DUNLAP\'92S\
Great Books at Little Prices\
\
\
QUINCY ADAMS SAWYER. A Picture of New England Home Life. With\
  illustrations by C. W. Reed, and Scenes Reproduced from the Play.\
\
One of the best New England stories ever written. It is\
full of homely human interest * * * there is a wealth of New\
England village character, scenes and incidents * * * forcibly,\
vividly and truthfully drawn. Few books have enjoyed a greater\
sale and popularity. Dramatized, it made the greatest rural play\
of recent times.\
\
\
THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF QUINCY ADAMS SAWYER. By Charles Felton Pidgin.\
  Illustrated by Henry Roth.\
\
All who love honest sentiment, quaint and sunny humor,\
and homespun philosophy will find these \'93Further Adventures\'94\
a book after their own heart.\
\
\
HALF A CHANCE. By Frederic S. Isham. Illustrated by Herman Pfeifer.\
\
The thrill of excitement will keep the reader in a state of\
suspense, and he will become personally concerned from the\
start, as to the central character, a very real man who suffers,\
dares--and achieves!\
\
\
VIRGINIA OF THE AIR LANES. By Herbert Quick. Illustrated by William R.\
  Leigh.\
\
The author has seized the romantic moment for the airship\
novel, and created the pretty story of \'93a lover and his lass\'94\
contending with an elderly relative for the monopoly of the\
skies. An exciting tale of adventure in midair.\
\
\
THE GAME AND THE CANDLE. By Eleanor M. Ingram. Illustrated by P. D.\
  Johnson.\
\
The hero is a young American, who, to save his family from\
poverty, deliberately commits a felony. Then follow his capture\
and imprisonment, and his rescue by a Russian Grand Duke. A\
stirring story, rich in sentiment.\
\
\
\
\
THE NOVELS OF\
GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON\
\
\
GRAUSTARK.\
\
A story of love behind a throne, telling how a young\
American met a lovely girl and followed her to a new and\
strange country. A thrilling, dashing narrative.\
\
\
BEVERLY OF GRAUSTARK.\
\
Beverly is a bewitching American girl who has gone to\
that stirring little principality--Graustark--to visit her friend\
the princess, and there has a romantic affair of her own.\
\
\
BREWSTER\'92S MILLIONS.\
\
A young man is required to spend _one_ million dollars in\
one year in order to inherit _seven_. How he does it forms the\
basis of a lively story.\
\
\
CASTLE CRANEYCROW.\
\
The story revolves round the abduction of a young American\
woman, her imprisonment in an old castle and the adventures\
created through her rescue.\
\
\
COWARDICE COURT.\
\
An amusing social feud in the Adirondacks in which an\
English girl is tempted into being a traitor by a romantic\
young American, forms the plot.\
\
\
THE DAUGHTER OF ANDERSON CROW.\
\
The story centers about the adopted daughter of the town\
marshal in a western village. Her parentage is shrouded in\
mystery, and the story concerns the secret that deviously\
works to the surface.\
\
\
THE MAN FROM BRODNEY\'92S.\
\
The hero meets a princess in a far-away island among\
fanatically hostile Musselmen. Romantic love-making amid\
amusing situations and exciting adventures.\
\
\
NEDRA.\
\
A young couple elope from Chicago to go to London\
traveling as brother and sister. They are shipwrecked and a\
strange mix-up occurs on account of it.\
\
\
THE SHERRODS.\
\
The scene is the Middle West and centers around a man\
who leads a double life. A most enthralling novel.\
\
\
TRUXTON KING.\
\
A handsome good-natured young fellow ranges on the\
earth looking for romantic adventures and is finally enmeshed\
in most complicated intrigues in Graustark.\
\
\
\
\
KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN\'92S\
STORIES OF PURE DELIGHT\
\
Full of originality and humor, kindliness and cheer\
\
\
_THE OLD PEABODY PEW._ Large Octavo. Decorative text pages, printed in\
  two colors. Illustrations by Alice Barber Stephens.\
\
One of the prettiest romances that has ever come from this\
author\'92s pen is made to bloom on Christmas Eve in the sweet\
freshness of an old New England meeting house.\
\
\
_PENELOPE\'92S PROGRESS._ Attractive cover design in colors.\
\
Scotland is the background for the merry doings of three very\
clever and original American girls. Their adventures in adjusting\
themselves to the Scot and his land are full of humor.\
\
\
_PENELOPE\'92S IRISH EXPERIENCES._ Uniform In style _with \'93Penelope\'92s\
  Progress.\'94_\
\
The trio of clever girls who rambled over Scotland cross the border\
to the Emerald Isle, and again they sharpen their wits against\
new conditions, and revel in the land of laughter and wit.\
\
\
_REBECCA OF SUNNYBROOK FARM._\
\
One of the most beautiful studies of childhood--Rebecca\'92s artistic,\
unusual and quaintly charming qualities stand out midst a circle\
of austere New Englanders. The stage version is making a phenomenal\
dramatic record.\
\
\
_NEW CHRONICLES OF REBECCA._ With illustrations by F. C. Yohn.\
\
Some more quaintly amusing chronicles that carry Rebecca\
through various stages to her eighteenth birthday.\
\
\
_ROSE O\'92 THE RIVER._ With illustrations by George Wright.\
\
The simple story of Rose, a country girl and Stephen a sturdy\
young farmer. The girl\'92s fancy for a city man interrupts their love\
and merges the story into an emotional strain where the reader follows\
the events with rapt attention.\
\
\
\
\
LOUIS TRACY\'92S\
CAPTIVATING AND EXHILARATING ROMANCES\
\
May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap\'92s list.\
\
\
_CYNTHIA\'92S CHAUFFEUR._ Illustrated by Howard Chandler Christy.\
\
A pretty American girl in London is touring in a car with\
a chauffeur whose identity puzzles her. An amusing mystery.\
\
\
_THE STOWAWAY GIRL._ Illustrated by Nesbitt Benson.\
\
A shipwreck, a lovely girl stowaway, a rascally captain, a\
fascinating officer, and thrilling adventures in South Seas.\
\
\
_THE CAPTAIN OF THE KANSAS._\
\
Love and the salt sea, a helpless ship whirled into the hands\
of cannibals, desperate fighting and a tender romance.\
\
\
_THE MESSAGE._ Illustrated by Joseph Cummings Chase.\
\
A bit of parchment found in the figurehead of an old vessel\
tells of a buried treasure. A thrilling mystery develops.\
\
\
_THE PILLAR OF LIGHT._\
\
The pillar thus designated was a lighthouse, and the author tells with\
exciting detail the terrible dilemma of its cut-off inhabitants.\
\
\
_THE WHEEL O\'92FORTUNE._ With illustrations by James\
Montgomery Flagg.\
\
The story deals with the finding of a papyrus containing\
the particulars of some of the treasures of the Queen of Sheba.\
\
\
_A SON OF THE IMMORTALS._ Illustrated by Howard\
Chandler Christy.\
\
A young American is proclaimed king of a little Balkan\
Kingdom, and a pretty Parisian art student is the power behind\
the throne.\
\
\
_THE WINGS OF THE MORNING._\
\
A sort of Robinson Crusoe _redivivus_ with modern settings\
and a very pretty love story added. The hero and heroine, are\
the only survivors of a wreck, and have many thrilling adventures\
on their desert island.\
\
_Ask for complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_\
\
\
\
\
B. M. Bower\'92s Novels\
Thrilling Western Romances\
\
Large 12 mos. Handsomely bound in cloth. Illustrated\
\
\
_CHIP, OF THE FLYING U_\
\
A breezy, wholesome tale, wherein the love affairs of Chip and\
Della Whitman are charmingly and humorously told. Chip\'92s\
jealousy of Dr. Cecil Grantham, who turns out to be a big, blue-eyed\
young woman is very amusing. A clever, realistic story of\
the American Cow-puncher.\
\
\
_THE HAPPY FAMILY_\
\
A lively and amusing story, dealing with the adventures of\
eighteen jovial, big hearted Montana cowboys. Foremost amongst\
them, we find Ananias Green, known as Andy, whose imaginative\
powers cause many lively and exciting adventures.\
\
\
_HER PRAIRIE KNIGHT_\
\
A realistic story of the plains, describing a gay party of Easterners\
who exchange a cottage at Newport for the rough homeliness\
of a Montana ranch-house. The merry-hearted cowboys, the\
fascinating Beatrice, and the effusive Sir Redmond, become living\
breathing personalities.\
\
\
_THE RANGE DWELLERS_\
\
Here are everyday, genuine cowboys, just as they really exist.\
Spirited action, a range feud between two families, and a Romeo\
and Juliet courtship makes this a bright, jolly, entertaining story,\
without a dull page.\
\
\
_THE LURE OF DIM TRAILS_\
\
A vivid portrayal of the experience of an Eastern author,\
among the cowboys of the West, in search of \'93local color\'94 for a new\
novel. \'93Bud\'94 Thurston learns many a lesson while following\
\'93the lure of the dim trails\'94 but the hardest, and probably the most\
welcome, is that of love.\
\
\
_THE LONESOME TRAIL_\
\
\'93Weary\'94 Davidson leaves the ranch for Portland, where conventional\
city life palls on him. A little branch of sage brush, pungent with\
the atmosphere of the prairie, and the recollection of a pair of\
large brown eyes soon compel his return. A wholesome love story.\
\
\
_THE LONG SHADOW_\
\
A vigorous Western story, sparkling with the free, outdoor,\
life of a mountain ranch. Its scenes shift rapidly and its actors play\
the game of life fearlessly and like men. It is a fine love story from\
start to finish.\
\
\
Ask for a complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction.\
\
GROSSETT & DUNLAP, 526 WEST 26TH ST., NEW YORK\
\
\
\
\
TRANSCRIBER\'92S NOTES:\
\
\
  Italicized or underlined text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.\
\
  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.\
\
  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.\
\
  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.\
\
\
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUSBAND\'92S STORY ***\
\
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will\
be renamed.\
\
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright\
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,\
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the\
United States without permission and without paying copyright\
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part\
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm\
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,\
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following\
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use\
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for\
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very\
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation\
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project\
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may\
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected\
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark\
license, especially commercial redistribution.\
\
START: FULL LICENSE\
\
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE\
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\
\
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free\
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project\
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full\
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at\
www.gutenberg.org/license.\
\
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
\
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all\
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or\
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your\
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a\
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound\
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the\
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph\
1.E.8.\
\
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be\
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few\
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See\
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this\
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.\
\
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the\
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection\
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual\
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United\
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the\
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not\
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,\
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as\
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope\
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting\
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm\
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the\
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily\
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the\
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when\
you share it without charge with others.\
\
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are\
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,\
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this\
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,\
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any\
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no\
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any\
country other than the United States.\
\
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\
\
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other\
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear\
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work\
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the\
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,\
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:\
\
  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and\
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no\
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it\
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this\
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the\
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where\
  you are located before using this eBook.\
\
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is\
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not\
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the\
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in\
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are\
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project\
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply\
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or\
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm\
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\
\
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted\
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any\
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms\
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works\
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the\
beginning of this work.\
\
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.\
\
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm License.\
\
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including\
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access\
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format\
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official\
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website\
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense\
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means\
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain\
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the\
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\
\
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works\
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\
\
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
provided that:\
\
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method\
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed\
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has\
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project\
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid\
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are\
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty\
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project\
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in\
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg\
  Literary Archive Foundation."\
\
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all\
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue\
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm\
  works.\
\
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of\
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of\
  receipt of the work.\
\
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than\
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing\
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of\
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set\
forth in Section 3 below.\
\
1.F.\
\
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project\
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may\
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate\
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other\
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or\
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or\
cannot be read by your equipment.\
\
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right\
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\
DAMAGE.\
\
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you\
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium\
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you\
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in\
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person\
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second\
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If\
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing\
without further opportunities to fix the problem.\
\
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO\
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT\
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\
\
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of\
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement\
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the\
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or\
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or\
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the\
remaining provisions.\
\
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in\
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the\
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,\
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of\
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this\
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or\
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any\
Defect you cause.\
\
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of\
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of\
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It\
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations\
from people in all walks of life.\
\
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's\
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will\
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future\
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see\
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at\
www.gutenberg.org\
\
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation\
\
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit\
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification\
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by\
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.\
\
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,\
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up\
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website\
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact\
\
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without\
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of\
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest\
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations\
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\
status with the IRS.\
\
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations\
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND\
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular\
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate\
\
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\
approach us with offers to donate.\
\
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\
\
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation\
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other\
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To\
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate\
\
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
\
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be\
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and\
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of\
volunteer support.\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed\
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in\
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not\
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper\
edition.\
\
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search\
facility: www.gutenberg.org\
\
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,\
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\
}